 1. SPRING.

     Spring, the sweet Spring, is the year's pleasant king;
     Then blooms each thing, then maids dance in a ring,
     Cold doth not sting, the pretty birds do sing,
     Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witta-woo!

     The palm and may make country houses gay,
     Lambs frisk and play, the shepherds pipe all day,
     And we hear aye birds tune their merry lay,
       Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witta-woo!

     The fields breathe sweet, the daisies kiss our feet,
     Young lovers meet, old wives a-sunning sit,
     In every street these tunes our ears do greet,
       Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witta-woo!
          Spring, the sweet Spring!

     T. NASH.


     2. SUMMONS TO LOVE.

     Phoebus, arise!
     And paint the sable skies
     With azure, white, and red:
     Rouse Memnon's mother from her Tithon's bed
     That she may thy career with roses spread:
     The nightingales thy coming eachwhere sing:
     Make an eternal spring!
     Give life to this dark world which lieth dead;
     Spread forth thy golden hair
     In larger locks than thou wast wont before,
     And emperor-like decore
     With diadem of pearl thy temples fair:
     Chase hence the ugly night
     Which serves but to make dear thy glorious light.

     —This is that happy morn,
     That day, long wishéd day
     Of all my life so dark,
     (If cruel stars have not my ruin sworn
     And fates not hope betray),
     Which, purely white, deserves
     An everlasting diamond should it mark.
     This is the morn should bring unto this grove
     My Love, to hear and recompense my love.
     Fair King, who all preserves,
     But show thy blushing beams,
     And thou two sweeter eyes
     Shalt see than those which by Penéus' streams
     Did once thy heart surprize.
     Now, Flora, deck thyself in fairest guise:
     If that ye winds would hear
     A voice surpassing far Amphion's lyre,
     Your furious chiding stay;
     Let Zephyr only breathe
     And with her tresses play.
     —The winds all silent are,
     And Phoebus in his chair
     Ensaffroning sea and air
     Makes vanish every star:
     Night like a drunkard reels
     Beyond the hills, to shun his flaming wheels:
     The fields with flowers are deck'd in every hue,
     The clouds with orient gold spangle their blue;
     Here is the pleasant place—
     And nothing wanting is, save She, alas.

     WILLIAM DRUMMOND OF HAWTHORNDEN.


     3. TIME AND LOVE.

     When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced
     The rich proud cost of out-worn buried age;
     When sometime lofty towers I see down-razed,
     And brass eternal slave to mortal rage.

     When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
     Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
     And the firm soil win of the watery main,
     Increasing store with loss, and loss with store.

     When I have seen such interchange of state,
     Or state itself confounded to decay,
     Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate—
     That Time will come and take my Love away.

     —This thought is as a death, which cannot choose
     But weep to have that which it fears to lose.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     4.

     Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
     But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
     How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
     Whose action is no stronger than a flower?

     O how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
     Against the wreckful siege of battering days,
     When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
     Nor gates of steel so strong but time decays?

     O fearful meditation, where, alack!
     Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
     Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back,
     Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?

     O! none, unless this miracle have might,
     That in black ink my love may still shine bright.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     5. THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE.

     Come live with me and be my Love,
     And we will all the pleasures prove
     That hills and valleys, dale and field,
     And all the craggy mountains yield.

     There will we sit upon the rocks
     And see the shepherds feed their flocks
     By shallow rivers, to whose falls
     Melodious birds sing madrigals.

     There will I make thee beds of roses
     And a thousand fragrant posies,
     A cap of flowers, and a kirtle
     Embroider'd all with leaves of myrtle.

     A gown made of the finest wool,
     Which from our pretty lambs we pull,
     Fair-lined slippers for the cold,
     With buckles of the purest gold.

     A belt of straw and ivy-buds
     With coral clasps and amber studs:
     And if these pleasures may thee move,
     Come live with me and be my Love.

     Thy silver dishes for thy meat
     As precious as the gods do eat,
     Shall on an ivory table be
     Prepared each day for thee and me.

     The shepherd swains shall dance and sing
     For thy delight each May-morning:
     If these delights thy mind may move,
     Then live with me and be my Love.

     C. MARLOWE.


     6. A MADRIGAL.

       Crabbed Age and Youth
       Cannot live together:
       Youth is full of pleasance,
       Age is full of care;
       Youth like summer morn,
       Age like winter weather;
       Youth like summer brave,
       Age like winter bare:
       Youth is full of sport,
       Age's breath is short,
       Youth is nimble, Age is lame:
       Youth is hot and bold,
       Age is weak and cold;
       Youth is wild, and Age is tame:—
       Age, I do abhor thee,
       Youth, I do adore thee;
       O! my Love, my Love is young!
       Age, I do defy thee—
       O, sweet shepherd, hie thee,
       For methinks thou stay'st too long.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     7.

       Under the greenwood tree
       Who loves to lie with me,
       And tune his merry note
       Unto the sweet bird's throat—
     Come hither, come hither, come hither!
          Here shall we see
          No enemy
     But winter and rough weather.

       Who doth ambition shun
       And loves to live i' the sun,
       Seeking the food he eats
       And pleased with what he gets—
     Come hither, come hither, come hither!
          Here shall he see
          No enemy
     But winter and rough weather.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     8.

     It was a lover and his lass
       With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonino!
     That o'er the green cornfield did pass,
     In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
     When birds do sing hey ding a ding:
       Sweet lovers love the Spring.
     Between the acres of the rye
     These pretty country folks would lie:
     This carol they began that hour,
     How that life was but a flower:
     And therefore take the present time
       With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonino!
     For love is crownéd with the prime
     In spring time, the only pretty ring time,
     When birds do sing, hey ding a ding;
       Sweet lovers love the Spring.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     9. PRESENT IN ABSENCE.

     Absence, hear thou my protestation
          Against thy strength,
          Distance, and length:
     Do what thou canst for alteration:
       For hearts of truest mettle
     Absence doth join, and Time doth settle.

     Who loves a mistress of such quality,
          He soon hath found
          Affection's ground
     Beyond time, place, and all mortality.
       To hearts that cannot vary
     Absence is Presence, Time doth tarry.

     By absence this good means I gain,
          That I can catch her,
          Where none can watch her,
     In some close corner of my brain:
       There I embrace and kiss her,
     And so I both enjoy and miss her.

     ANON.


     10. ABSENCE.

     Being your slave what should I do but tend
     Upon the hours and times of your desire?
     I have no precious time at all to spend,
     Nor services to do, till you require:

     Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour
     Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
     Nor think the bitterness of absence sour
     When you have bid your servant once adieu:

     Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
     Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
     But like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
     Save where you are, how happy you make those;—

     So true a fool is love, that in your will,
     Though you do any thing, he thinks no ill.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     11.

     How like a winter hath my absence been
     From Thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
     What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen,
     What old December's bareness everywhere!

     And yet this time removed was summer's time:
     The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
     Bearing the wanton burden of the prime
     Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:

     Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
     But hope of orphans, and unfather'd fruit;
     For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
     And, thou away, the very birds are mute;

     Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
     That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     12. A CONSOLATION.

     When in disgrace with Fortune and men's eyes
     I all alone beweep my outcast state,
     And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
     And look upon myself, and curse my fate;

     Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
     Featured like him, like him with friends possest,
     Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
     With what I most enjoy contented least;

     Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
     Haply I think on Thee—and then my state,
     Like to the lark at break of day arising
     From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;

     For thy sweet love remember'd, such wealth brings
     That then I scorn to change my state with kings.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     13. THE UNCHANGEABLE.

     O never say that I was false of heart,
     Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify:
     As easy might I from my self depart
     As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie;

     That is my home of love, if I have ranged,
     Like him that travels, I return again,
     Just to the time, not with the time exchanged,
     So that myself bring water for my stain.

     Never believe, though in my nature reign'd
     All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
     That it could so preposterously be stain'd
     To leave for nothing all thy sum of good:

     For nothing this wide universe I call,
     Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     14.

     To me, fair Friend, you never can be old,
     For as you were when first your eye I eyed
     Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold
     Have from the forests shook three summers' pride;

     Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd,
     In process of the seasons have I seen,
     Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,
     Since first I saw you fresh which yet are green.

     Ah! yet doth beauty, like a dial hand,
     Steal from his figure, and no pace perceived;
     So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
     Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived:

     For fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred,—
     Ere you were born, was beauty's summer dead.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     15. DIAPHENIA.

        Diaphenia like the daffadowndilly,
        White as the sun, fair as the lily,
      Heigh ho, how do I love thee!
        I do love thee as my lambs
        Are belovéd of their dams;
     How blest were I if thou would'st prove me.

        Diaphenia like the spreading roses,
        That in thy sweets all sweets encloses,
      Fair sweet, how do I love thee!
        I do love thee as each flower
        Loves the sun's life-giving power;
     For dead, thy breath to life might move me.

        Diaphenia like to all things blesséd
        When all thy praises are expresséd,
      Dear joy, how do I love thee!
        As the birds do love the spring,
        Or the bees their careful king:
     Then in requite, sweet virgin, love me!

     H. CONSTABLE.


     16. ROSALINE.

     Like to the clear in highest sphere
     Where all imperial glory shines,
     Of selfsame colour is her hair
     Whether unfolded, or in twines:
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Her eyes are sapphires set in snow,
     Resembling heaven by every wink;
     The Gods do fear whenas they glow,
     And I do tremble when I think
      Heigh ho, would she were mine!

     Her cheeks are like the blushing cloud
     That beautifies Aurora's face,
     Or like the silver crimson shroud
     That Phoebus' smiling looks doth grace;
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Her lips are like two budded roses
     Whom ranks of lilies neighbour nigh,
     Within which bounds she balm encloses
     Apt to entice a deity:
      Heigh ho, would she were mine!

     Her neck like to a stately tower
     Where Love himself imprison'd lies,
     To watch for glances every hour
     From her divine and sacred eyes:
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Her paps are centres of delight,
     Her breasts are orbs of heavenly frame,
     Where Nature moulds the dew of light
     To feed perfection with the same:
      Heigh ho, would she were mine!

     With orient pearl, with ruby red,
     With marble white, with sapphire blue,
     Her body every way is fed,
     Yet soft in touch and sweet in view:
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Nature herself her shape admires;
     The Gods are wounded in her sight;
     And Love forsakes his heavenly fires
     And at her eyes his brand doth light:
      Heigh ho, would she were mine!

     Then muse not, Nymphs, though I bemoan
     The absence of fair Rosaline,
     Since for a fair there's fairer none,
     Nor for her virtues so divine:
      Heigh ho, fair Rosaline!
     Heigh ho, my heart! would God that she were mine!

     T. LODGE.


     17. COLIN.

     Beauty sat bathing by a spring
      Where fairest shades did hide her;
     The winds blew calm, the birds did sing,
      The cool streams ran beside her.

     My wanton thoughts enticed mine eye
      To see what was forbidden:
     But better memory said, fie!
      So vain desire was chidden:—
          Hey nonny nonny O!
          Hey nonny nonny!

     Into a slumber then I fell,
     When fond imagination
     Seeméd to see, but could not tell
     Her feature or her fashion.
     But ev'n as babes in dreams do smile,
     And sometimes fall a-weeping,
     So I awaked as wise this while
     As when I fell a-sleeping:—
          Hey nonny nonny O!
          Hey nonny nonny!

     THE SHEPHERD TONIE.


     18. TO HIS LOVE.

     Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
     Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
     Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
     And summer's lease hath all too short a date:

     Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
     And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
     And every fair from fair sometime declines,
     By chance, or nature's changing course, untrimm'd.

     But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
     Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;
     Nor shall death brag thou wanderest in his shade,
     When in eternal lines to time thou growest.

     So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
     So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     19. TO HIS LOVE.

     When in the chronicle of wasted time
     I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
     And beauty making beautiful old rhyme
     In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights;

     Then in the blazon of sweet beauty's best
     Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
     I see their antique pen would have exprest
     Ev'n such a beauty as you master now.

     So all their praises are but prophecies
     Of this our time, all, you prefiguring;
     And for they look'd but with divining eyes,
     They had not skill enough your worth to sing:

     For we, which now behold these present days,
     Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     20. LOVE'S PERJURIES.

     On a day, alack the day!
     Love, whose month is ever May,
     Spied a blossom passing fair
     Playing in the wanton air:
     Through the velvet leaves the wind
     All unseen 'gan passage find;
     That the lover, sick to death,
     Wish'd himself the heaven's breath.
     Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow;
     Air, would I might triumph so!
     But, alack, my hand is sworn
     Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn:
     Vow, alack, for youth unmeet;
     Youth so apt to pluck a sweet.
     Do not call it sin in me
     That I am forsworn for thee:
     Thou for whom e'en Jove would swear
     Juno but an Ethiope were,
     And deny himself for Jove,
     Turning mortal for thy love.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     21. A SUPPLICATION.

     Forget not yet the tried intent
     Of such a truth as I have meant;
     My great travail so gladly spent,
                       Forget not yet!

     Forget not yet when first began
     The weary life ye know, since whan
     The suit, the service, none tell can;
                       Forget not yet!

     Forget not yet the great assays,
     The cruel wrong, the scornful ways,
     The painful patience in delays,
                       Forget not yet!

     Forget not! O, forget not this,
     How long ago hath been, and is
     The mind that never meant amiss—
                       Forget not yet!

     Forget not then thine own approved
     The which so long hath thee so loved,
     Whose steadfast faith yet never moved—
                       Forget not this!

     SIR T. WYAT.


     22. TO AURORA.

     O if thou knew'st how thou thyself does harm,
     And dost prejudge thy bliss, and spoil thy rest;
     Then thou would'st melt the ice out of thy breast
     And thy relenting heart would kindly warm.

     O if thy pride did not our joys controul,
     What world of loving wonders should'st thou see!
     For if I saw thee once transform'd in me,
     Then in thy bosom I would pour my soul;

     Then all my thoughts should in thy visage shine,
     And if that aught mischanced thou should'st not moan
     Nor bear the burthen of thy griefs alone;
     No, I would have my share in what were thine:

     And whilst we thus should make our sorrows one,
     This happy harmony would make them none.

     W. ALEXANDER, EARL OF STERLINE.


     23. TRUE LOVE.

     Let me not to the marriage of true minds
     Admit impediments. Love is not love
     Which alters when it alteration finds,
     Or bends with the remover to remove:—

     O no! it is an ever-fixéd mark
     That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
     It is the star to every wandering bark
     Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.

     Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
     Within his bending sickle's compass come;
     Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
     But bears it out ev'n to the edge of doom:—

     If this be error and upon me proved,
     I never writ, nor no man ever loved.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     24. A DITTY.

     My true love hath my heart, and I have his,
     By just exchange one to the other given:
     I hold his dear, and mine he cannot miss,
     There never was a better bargain driven:
      My true love hath my heart, and I have his.

     His heart in me keeps him and me in one,
     My heart in him his thoughts and senses guides:
     He loves my heart, for once it was his own,
     I cherish his because in me it bides:
      My true-love hath my heart, and I have his.

     SIR P. SIDNEY.


     25. LOVE'S OMNIPRESENCE.

     Were I as base as is the lowly plain,
     And you, my Love, as high as heaven above,
     Yet should the thoughts of me your humble swain
     Ascend to heaven, in honour of my Love.

     Were I as high as heaven above the plain,
     And you, my Love, as humble and as low
     As are the deepest bottoms of the main,
     Whereso'er you were, with you my love should go.

     Were you the earth, dear Love, and I the skies,
     My love should shine on you like to the sun,
     And look upon you with ten thousand eyes
     Till heaven wax'd blind, and till the world were done.

     Whereso'er I am, below, or else above you,
     Whereso'er you are, my heart shall truly love you.

     J. SYLVESTER.


     26. CARPE DIEM.

     O Mistress mine, where are you roaming?
     O, stay and hear! your true-love's coming
        That can sing both high and low;
     Trip no further, pretty sweeting,
     Journeys end in lovers' meeting—
        Every wise man's son doth know.

     What is love? 'tis not hereafter;
     Present mirth hath present laughter;
        What's to come is still unsure:
     In delay there lies no plenty,—
     Then come kiss me, Sweet-and-twenty,
        Youth's a stuff will not endure.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     27. WINTER.

     When icicles hang by the wall
      And Dick the shepherd blows his nail,
     And Tom bears logs into the hall,
      And milk comes frozen home in pail;
     When blood is nipt, and ways be foul,
     Then nightly sings the staring owl
                 Tuwhoo!
     Tuwhit! Tuwhoo! A merry note!
     While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

     When all around the wind doth blow,
      And coughing drowns the parson's saw,
     And birds sit brooding in the snow,
      And Marian's nose looks red and raw:
     When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl—
     Then nightly sings the staring owl
                 Tuwhoo!
     Tuwhit! Tuwhoo! A merry note!
     While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     28.

     That time of year thou may'st in me behold
     When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
     Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
     Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.

     In me thou seest the twilight of such day
     As after sunset fadeth in the west,
     Which by and by black night doth take away,
     Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.

     In me thou seest the glowing of such fire,
     That on the ashes of his youth doth lie
     As the deathbed whereon it must expire,
     Consumed with that which it was nourish'd by.

     —This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
     To love that well which thou must leave ere long.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     29. REMEMBRANCE.

     When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
     I summon up remembrance of things past,
     I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
     And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste

     Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
     For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
     And weep afresh love's long-since-cancell'd woe,
     And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight.

     Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
     And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
     The sad account of fore-bemoanéd moan,
     Which I new pay as if not paid before:

     —But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
     All losses are restored, and sorrows end.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     30. REVOLUTIONS.

     Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore
     So do our minutes hasten to their end;
     Each changing place with that which goes before,
     In sequent toil all forwards do contend.

     Nativity once in the main of light
     Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
     Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
     And Time that gave, doth now his gift confound.

     Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth,
     And delves the parallels in beauty's brow;
     Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
     And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.

     And yet, to times in hope, my verse shall stand
     Praising Thy worth, despite his cruel hand.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     31.

     Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
     And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:
     The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing,
     My bonds in thee are all determinate.

     For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
     And for that riches where is my deserving?
     The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
     And so my patent back again is swerving.

     Thyself thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
     Or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
     So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
     Comes home again, on better judgement making.

     Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter;
     In sleep, a king; but waking, no such matter.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     32. THE LIFE WITHOUT PASSION.

     They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
     That do not do the thing they most do show,
     Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
     Unmovéd, cold, and to temptation slow,—

     They rightly do inherit Heaven's graces,
     And husband nature's riches from expense;
     They are the lords and owners of their faces,
     Others, but stewards of their excellence.

     The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
     Though to itself it only live and die;
     But if that flower with base infection meet,
     The basest weed outbraves his dignity:

     For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
     Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     33. THE LOVER'S APPEAL.

       And wilt thou leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay! for shame,
       To save thee from the blame
       Of all my grief and grame.
       And wilt thou leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay!

       And wilt thou leave me thus,
       That hath loved thee so long
       In wealth and woe among:
       And is thy heart so strong
       As for to leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay!

       And wilt thou leave me thus,
       That hath given thee my heart
       Never for to depart
       Neither for pain nor smart:
       And wilt thou leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay!

       And wilt thou leave me thus,
       And have no more pity
       Of him that loveth thee?
       Alas! thy cruelty!
       And wilt thou leave me thus?
       Say nay! say nay!

     SIR T. WYAT.


     34. THE NIGHTINGALE.

     As it fell upon a day
     In the merry month of May,
     Sitting in a pleasant shade
     Which a grove of myrtles made,
     Beasts did leap and birds did sing,
     Trees did grow and plants did spring,
     Every thing did banish moan
     Save the Nightingale alone.
     She, poor bird, as all forlorn,
     Lean'd her breast against a thorn,
     And there sung the dolefullest ditty,
     That to hear it was great pity.
     Fie, fie, fie, now would she cry;
     Tereu, tereu, by and by:
     That to hear her so complain
     Scarce I could from tears refrain;
     For her griefs so lively shown
     Made me think upon mine own.
     —Ah! thought I, thou mourn'st in vain,
     None takes pity on thy pain:
     Senseless trees, they cannot hear thee,
     Ruthless beasts, they will not cheer thee;
     King Pandion, he is dead,
     All thy friends are lapp'd in lead:
     All thy fellow birds do sing
     Careless of thy sorrowing:
     Even so, poor bird, like thee,
     None alive will pity me.

     R. BARNEFIELD.


     35.

     Care-charmer Sleep, son of the sable Night,
     Brother to Death, in silent darkness born,
     Relieve my anguish, and restore the light;
     With dark forgetting of my care return.

     And let the day be time enough to mourn
     The shipwreck of my ill adventured youth:
     Let waking eyes suffice to wail their scorn,
     Without the torment of the night's untruth.

     Cease, dreams, the images of day-desires,
     To model forth the passions of the morrow;
     Never let rising Sun approve you liars
     To add more grief to aggravate my sorrow:

     Still let me sleep, embracing clouds in vain,
     And never wake to feel the day's disdain.

     S. DANIEL.


     36. MADRIGAL.

        Take O take those lips away
        That so sweetly were forsworn,
        And those eyes, the break of day,
        Lights that do mislead the morn:
        But my kisses bring again,
                  Bring again—
        Seals of love, but seal'd in vain,
                  Seal'd in vain!

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     37. LOVE'S FAREWELL.

     Since there's no help, come let us kiss and part,—
     Nay, I have done, you get no more of me;
     And I am glad, yea glad with all my heart,
     That thus so cleanly I myself can free;

     Shake hands for ever, cancel all our vows,
     And when we meet at any time again,
     Be it not seen in either of our brows
     That we one jot of former love retain.

     Now at the last gasp of love's latest breath,
     When his pulse failing, passion speechless lies,
     When faith is kneeling by his bed of death,
     And innocence is closing up his eyes,

     —Now if thou wouldst, when all have given him over,
     From death to life thou might'st him yet recover!

     M. DRAYTON.


     38. TO HIS LUTE.

     My lute, be as thou wert when thou did'st grow
     With thy green mother in some shady grove,
     When immelodious winds but made thee move,
     And birds their ramage did on thee bestow.

     Since that dear Voice which did thy sounds approve,
     Which wont in such harmonious strains to flow,
     Is reft from Earth to tune those spheres above,
     What art thou but a harbinger of woe?

     Thy pleasing notes be pleasing notes no more,
     But orphan's wailings to the fainting ear;
     Each stroke a sigh, each sound draws forth a tear;
     For which be silent as in woods before:

     Or if that any hand to touch thee deign,
     Like widow'd turtle still her loss complain.

     W. DRUMMOND.


     39. BLIND LOVE.

     O me! what eyes hath love put in my head
     Which have no correspondence with true sight:
     Or if they have, where is my judgment fled
     That censures falsely what they see aright?

     If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
     What means the world to say it is not so?
     If it be not, then love doth well denote,
     Love's eye is not so true as all men's: No,

     How can it? O how can love's eye be true,
     That is so vex'd with watching and with tears?
     No marvel then though I mistake my view:
     The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.

     O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
     Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find!

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     40. THE UNFAITHFUL SHEPHERDESS.

     While that the sun with his beams hot
     Scorchéd the fruits in vale and mountain,
     Philon the shepherd, late forgot,
     Sitting beside a crystal fountain,
       In shadow of a green oak tree
       Upon his pipe this song play'd he:
     Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love,
     Untrue Love, untrue Love, adieu Love;
     Your mind is light, soon lost for new love.

     So long as I was in your sight
     I was your heart, your soul, and treasure;
     And evermore you sobb'd and sigh'd
     Burning in flames beyond all measure:
       —Three days endured your love to me,
       And it was lost in other three!
     Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love,
     Untrue Love, untrue Love, adieu Love;
     Your mind is light, soon lost for new love.

     Another Shepherd you did see
     To whom your heart was soon enchainéd;
     Full soon your love was leapt from me,
     Full soon my place he had obtainéd.
       Soon came a third, your love to win,
       And we were out and he was in.
     Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love,
     Untrue Love, untrue Love, adieu Love;
     Your mind is light, soon lost for new love.

     Sure you have made me passing glad
     That you your mind so soon removéd,
     Before that I the leisure had
     To choose you for my best belovéd:
       For all your love was past and done
       Two days before it was begun:—
     Adieu Love, adieu Love, untrue Love,
     Untrue Love, untrue Love, adieu Love;
     Your mind is light, soon lost for new love.

     ANON.


     41. A RENUNCIATION.

     If women could be fair, and yet not fond,
     Or that their love were firm, not fickle still,
     I would not marvel that they make men bond
     By service long to purchase their good will;
     But when I see how frail those creatures are,
     I muse that men forget themselves so far.

     To mark the choice they make, and how they change,
     How oft from Phoebus they do flee to Pan;
     Unsettled still, like haggards wild they range,
     These gentle birds that fly from man to man;
     Who would not scorn and shake them from the fist,
     And let them fly, fair fools, which way they list?

     Yet for disport we fawn and flatter both,
     To pass the time when nothing else can please,
     And train them to our lure with subtle oath,
     Till, weary of their wiles, ourselves we ease;
     And then we say when we their fancy try,
     To play with fools, O what a fool was I!

     E. VERE, EARL OF OXFORD.


     42.

          Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
          Thou art not so unkind
          As man's ingratitude;
          Thy tooth is not so keen,
          Because thou art not seen,
          Although thy breath be rude.
     Heigh ho! sing heigh ho! unto the green holly:
     Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
          Then, heigh ho! the holly!
          This life is most jolly.

          Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
          That dost not bite so nigh
          As benefits forgot:
          Though thou the waters warp,
          Thy sting is not so sharp
          As friend remember'd not.
     Heigh ho! sing heigh ho! unto the green holly:
     Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
          Then heigh ho, the holly!
          This life is most jolly.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     43. MADRIGAL.

          My thoughts hold mortal strife;
          I do detest my life,
          And with lamenting cries
          Peace to my soul to bring
     Oft call that prince which here doth monarchise:
     —But he, grim grinning King,
     Who caitiffs scorns, and doth the blest surprise,
     Late having deck'd with beauty's rose his tomb,
     Disdains to crop a weed, and will not come.

     W. DRUMMOND.


     44. DIRGE OF LOVE.

       Come away, come away, Death,
     And in sad cypres let me be laid;
       Fly away, fly away, breath;
     I am slain by a fair cruel maid.
     My shroud of white, stuck all with yew,
          O prepare it!
     My part of death no one so true
          Did share it.

       Not a flower, not a flower sweet,
     On my black coffin let there be strown;
       Not a friend, not a friend greet
     My poor corpse, where my bones shall thrown:
     A thousand thousand sighs to save,
          Lay me, O where
     Sad true lover never find my grave,
          To weep there.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     45. FIDELE.

     Fear no more the heat o' the sun,
        Nor the furious winter's rages:
     Thou thy worldly task hast done,
        Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages:
     Golden lads and girls all must,
     As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.

     Fear no more the frown o' the great,
        Thou art past the tyrant's stroke;
     Care no more to clothe and eat;
        To thee the reed is as the oak:
     The sceptre, learning, physic, must
     All follow this, and come to dust.

     Fear no more the lightning flash
        Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;
     Fear not slander, censure rash;
        Thou hast finish'd joy and moan:
     All lovers young, all lovers must
     Consign to thee, and come to dust.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     46. A SEA DIRGE.

     Full fathom five thy father lies:
        Of his bones are coral made;
     Those are pearls that were his eyes:
        Nothing of him that doth fade,
     But doth suffer a sea-change
     Into something rich and strange;
     Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell:
     Hark! now I hear them,—
        Ding, dong, Bell.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     47. A LAND DIRGE.

     Call for the robin-redbreast and the wren,
     Since o'er shady groves they hover
     And with leaves and flowers do cover
     The friendless bodies of unburied men.
     Call unto his funeral dole
     The ant, the field-mouse, and the mole
     To rear him hillocks that shall keep him warm
     And (when gay tombs are robb'd) sustain no harm;
     But keep the wolf far thence, that's foe to men,
     For with his nails he'll dig them up again.

     J. WEBSTER.


     48. POST MORTEM.

     If Thou survive my well-contented day
     When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,
     And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
     These poor rude lines of thy deceaséd lover:

     Compare them with the bettering of the time,
     And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
     Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme
     Exceeded by the height of happier men.

     O then vouchsafe me but this loving thought—
     "Had my friend's muse grown with this growing age,
     A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
     To march in ranks of better equipage:

     But since he died, and poets better prove,
     Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love."

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     49. THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH.

     No longer mourn for me when I am dead
     Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
     Give warning to the world, that I am fled
     From this vile world, with vilest worms to dwell;

     Nay, if you read this line, remember not
     The hand that writ it; for I love you so,
     That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot
     If thinking on me then should make you woe.

     O if, I say, you look upon this verse
     When I perhaps compounded am with clay
     Do not so much as my poor name rehearse,
     But let your love even with my life decay;

     Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
     And mock you with me after I am gone.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     50. MADRIGAL.

     Tell me where is Fancy bred,
     Or in the heart or in the head?
     How begot, how nourishéd?
          Reply, reply.
     It is engender'd in the eyes,
     With gazing fed; and Fancy dies
     In the cradle where it lies:
     Let us all ring fancy's knell;
     I'll begin it,—Ding, dong, bell.
               —Ding, dong, bell.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     51. CUPID AND CAMPASPE.

     Cupid and my Campaspe play'd
     At cards for kisses; Cupid paid:
     He stakes his quiver, bow, and arrows,
     His mother's doves, and team of sparrows;
     Loses them too; then down he throws
     The coral of his lip, the rose
     Growing on's cheek (but none knows how);
     With these, the crystal of his brow,
     And then the dimple on his chin;
     All these did my Campaspe win:
     At last he set her both his eyes—
     She won, and Cupid blind did rise.
        O Love! has she done this to thee?
        What shall, alas! become of me?

     J. LYLYE.


     52.

     Pack, clouds, away, and welcome day,
      With night we banish sorrow;
     Sweet air blow soft, mount larks aloft
      To give my Love good-morrow!
     Wings from the wind to please her mind,
      Notes from the lark I'll borrow;
     Bird, prune thy wing, nightingale sing,
      To give my Love good-morrow;
        To give my Love good-morrow
        Notes from them both I'll borrow.

     Wake from thy nest, Robin-redbreast!
      Sing, birds, in every furrow;
     And from each hill, let music shrill
      Give my fair Love good-morrow!
     Blackbird and thrush in every bush,
      Stare, linnet, and cock-sparrow!
     You pretty elves, amongst yourselves
      Sing my fair Love good-morrow;
        To give my Love good-morrow
        Sing birds, in every furrow!

     T. HEYWOOD.


     53. PROTHALAMION.

     Calm was the day, and through the trembling air
     Sweet-breathing Zephyrus did softly play—
     A gentle spirit, that lightly did delay
     Hot Titan's beams, which then did glister fair;
     When I, (whom sullen care,
     Through discontent of my long fruitless stay
     In princes' court, and expectation vain
     Of idle hopes, which still do fly away
     Like empty shadows, did afflict my brain)
     Walk'd forth to ease my pain
     Along the shore of silver-streaming Thames;
     Whose rutty bank, the which his river hems,
     Was painted all with variable flowers,
     And all the meads adorn'd with dainty gems
     Fit to deck maidens' bowers,
     And crown their paramours
     Against the bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     There in a meadow by the river's side,
     A flock of nymphs I chancéd to espy,
     All lovely daughters of the flood thereby,
     With goodly greenish locks all loose untied
     As each had been a bride;
     And each one had a little wicker basket
     Made of fine twigs, entrailéd curiously,
     In which they gather'd flowers to fill their flasket,
     And with fine fingers cropt full feateously
     The tender stalks on high.
     Of every sort which in that meadow grew
     They gather'd some; the violet, pallid blue,
     The little daisy that at evening closes,
     The virgin lily and the primrose true:
     With store of vermeil roses,
     To deck their bridegrooms' posies
     Against the bridal day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     With that I saw two swans of goodly hue
     Come softly swimming down along the lee;
     Two fairer birds I yet did never see;
     The snow which doth the top of Pindus strow,
     Did never whiter show,
     Nor Jove himself, when he a swan would be
     For love of Leda, whiter did appear;
     Yet Leda was (they say) as white as he,
     Yet not so white as these, nor nothing near;
     So purely white they were,
     That even the gentle stream, the which them bare,
     Seem'd foul to them, and bade his billows spare
     To wet their silken feathers, lest they might
     Soil their fair plumes with water not so fair,
     And mar their beauties bright
     That shone as Heaven's light
     Against their bridal day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     Eftsoons the nymphs, which now had flowers their fill,
     Ran all in haste to see that silver brood
     As they came floating on the crystal flood;
     Whom when they saw, they stood amazéd still
     Their wondering eyes to fill;
     Them seem'd they never saw a sight so fair
     Of fowls, so lovely, that they sure did deem
     Them heavenly born, or to be that same pair
     Which through the sky draw Venus' silver team;
     For sure they did not seem
     To be begot of any earthly seed,
     But rather angels, or of angels' breed;
     Yet were they bred of summer's heat, they say,
     In sweetest season, when each flower and weed
     The earth did fresh array;
     So fresh they seem'd as day,
     Even as their bridal day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     Then forth they all out of their baskets drew
     Great store of flowers, the honour of the field,
     That to the sense did fragrant odours yield,
     All which upon those goodly birds they threw
     And all the waves did strew,
     That like old Peneus' waters they did seem
     When down along by pleasant Tempe's shore
     Scatter'd with flowers, through Thessaly they stream,
     That they appear, through lilies' plenteous store,
     Like a bride's chamber-floor.
     Two of those nymphs meanwhile two garlands bound
     Of freshest flowers which in that mead they found,
     The which presenting all in trim array,
     Their snowy foreheads therewithal they crown'd
     Whilst one did sing this lay
     Prepar'd against that day,
     Against their bridal day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     "Ye gentle birds! the world's fair ornament,
     And Heaven's glory, whom this happy hour
     Doth lead unto your lovers' blissful bower,
     Joy may you have, and gentle hearts content
     Of your loves complement;
     And let fair Venus, that is queen of love,
     With her heart-quelling son upon you smile,
     Whose smile, they say, hath virtue to remove
     All love's dislike, and friendship's faulty guile
     For ever to assoil.
     Let endless peace your steadfast hearts accord,
     And blesséd plenty wait upon your board;
     And let your bed with pleasures chaste abound,
     That fruitful issue may to you afford
     Which may your foes confound,
     And make your joys redound
     Upon your bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song."

     So ended she; and all the rest around
     To her redoubled that her undersong,
     Which said their bridal day should not be long:
     And gentle Echo from the neighbour ground
     Their accents did resound.
     So forth those joyous birds did pass along
     Adown the lee that to them murmur'd low,
     As he would speak but that he lack'd a tongue,
     Yet did by signs his glad affection show,
     Making his stream run slow.
     And all the fowl which in his flood did dwell
     'Gan flock about these twain, that did excel
     The rest, so far as Cynthia doth shend
     The lesser stars. So they, enrangéd well,
     Did on those two attend,
     And their best service lend
     Against their wedding day, which was not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     At length they all to merry London came,
     To merry London, my most kindly nurse,
     That to me gave this life's first native source,
     Though from another place I take my name,
     An house of ancient fame:
     There when they came whereas those bricky towers
     The which on Thames' broad agéd back do ride,
     Where now the studious lawyers have their bowers,
     There whilome wont the Templar-knights to bide,
     Till they decay'd through pride:
     Next whereunto there stands a stately place,
     Where oft I gainéd gifts and goodly grace
     Of that great lord, which therein wont to dwell,
     Whose want too well now feels my friendless case;
     But ah! here fits not well
     Old woes, but joys to tell
     Against the bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     Yet therein now doth lodge a noble peer,
     Great England's glory and the world's wide wonder,
     Whose dreadful name late thro' all Spain did thunder,
     And Hercules' two pillars standing near
     Did make to quake and fear:
     Fair branch of honour, flower of chivalry!
     That fillest England with thy triumphs' fame
     Joy have thou of thy noble victory,
     And endless happiness of thine own name
     That promiseth the same;
     That through thy prowess and victorious arms,
     Thy country may be freed from foreign harms,
     And great Eliza's glorious name may ring
     Through all the world, fill'd with thy wide alarms
     Which some brave Muse may sing
     To ages following,
     Upon the bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly till I end my song.

     From those high towers this noble lord issúing,
     Like radiant Hesper, when his golden hair
     In th' ocean billows he hath bathéd fair,
     Descended to the river's open viewing
     With a great train ensuing.
     Above the rest were goodly to be seen
     Two gentle knights of lovely face and feature,
     Beseeming well the bower of any queen,
     With gifts of wit and ornaments of nature,
     Fit for so goodly stature,
     That like the twins of Jove they seem'd in sight
     Which deck the baldric of the Heavens bright;
     They two, forth pacing to the river's side,
     Received those two fair brides, their love's delight;
     Which, at th' appointed tide,
     Each one did make his bride
     Against their bridal day, which is not long:
       Sweet Thames! run softly, till I end my song.

     E. SPENSER.


     54. THE HAPPY HEART.

     Art thou poor, yet hast thou golden slumbers?
          O sweet content!
     Art thou rich, yet is thy mind perplexéd?
          O punishment!
     Dost thou laugh to see how fools are vexéd
     To add to golden numbers, golden numbers?
     O sweet content! O sweet, O sweet content!
     Work apace, apace, apace, apace;
     Honest labour bears a lovely face;
     Then hey nonny nonny, hey nonny nonny!

     Canst drink the waters of the crispéd spring?
          O sweet content!
     Swimm'st thou in wealth, yet sink'st in thine own tears?
          O punishment!
     Then he that patiently want's burden bears,
     No burden bears, but is a king, a king!
     O sweet content! O sweet, O sweet content!
     Work apace, apace, apace, apace;
     Honest labour bears a lovely face;
     Then hey nonny nonny, hey nonny nonny!

     T. DEKKER.


     55.

     This Life, which seems so fair,
     Is like a bubble blown up in the air
     By sporting children's breath,
     Who chase it everywhere
     And strive who can most motion it bequeath.
     And though it sometimes seem of its own might
     Like to an eye of gold to be fix'd there,
     And firm to hover in that empty height,
     That only is because it is so light.
     —But in that pomp it doth not long appear;
     For when 'tis most admiréd, in a thought,
     Because it erst was nought, it turns to nought.

     W. DRUMMOND.


     56. SOUL AND BODY.

     Poor Soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
     Fool'd by those rebel powers that thee array,
     Why dost thou pine within, and suffer dearth,
     Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?

     Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
     Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
     Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
     Eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end?

     Then, Soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
     And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
     Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
     Within be fed, without be rich no more:—

     So shall thou feed on death, that feeds on men,
     And death once dead, there's no more dying then.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     57. LIFE.

     The World's a bubble, and the Life of Man
            Less than a span:
     In his conception wretched, from the womb
            So to the tomb;
     Curst from his cradle, and brought up to years
            With cares and fears.
     Who then to frail mortality shall trust,
     But limns on water, or but writes in dust.

     Yet whilst with sorrow here we live opprest,
            What life is best?
     Courts are but only superficial schools
            To dandle fools:
     The rural parts are turn'd into a den
            Of savage men:
     And where's a city from foul vice so free,
     But may be term'd the worst of all the three?

     Domestic cares afflict the husband's bed,
            Or pains his head:
     Those that live single, take it for a curse,
            Or do things worse:
     Some would have children: those that have them, moan
            Or wish them gone:
     What is it, then, to have, or have no wife,
     But single thraldom, or a double strife?

     Our own affections still at home to please
            Is a disease:
     To cross the seas to any foreign soil,
            Peril and toil:
     Wars with their noise affright us; when they cease,
            We are worse in peace;—
     What then remains, but that we still should cry
     For being born, or, being born, to die

     LORD BACON


     58. THE LESSONS OF NATURE.

     Of this fair volume which we World do name
     If we the sheets and leaves could turn with care,
     Of Him who it corrects, and did it frame,
     We clear might read the art and wisdom rare:

     Find out His power which wildest powers doth tame,
     His providence extending everywhere,
     His justice which proud rebels doth not spare,
     In every page, no period of the same.

     But silly we, like foolish children, rest
     Well pleased with colour'd vellum, leaves of gold,
     Fair dangling ribbands, leaving what is best,
     On the great Writer's sense ne'er taking hold;

     Or if by chance we stay our minds on aught,
     It is some picture on the margin wrought.

     W. DRUMMOND.


     59.

     Doth then the world go thus, doth all thus move?
     Is this the justice which on Earth we find?
     Is this that firm decree which all doth bind?
     Are these your influences, Powers above?

     Those souls which vice's moody mists most blind,
     Blind Fortune, blindly, most their friend doth prove;
     And they who thee, poor idle Virtue! love,
     Ply like a feather toss'd by storm and wind.

     Ah! if a Providence doth sway this all,
     Why should best minds groan under most distress?
     Or why should pride humility make thrall,
     And injuries the innocent oppress?

     Heavens! hinder, stop this fate; or grant a time
     When good may have, as well as bad, their prime!

     W. DRUMMOND.


     60. THE WORLD'S WAY.

     Tired with all these, for restful death I cry—
     As, to behold desert a beggar born,
     And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
     And purest faith unhappily forsworn,

     And gilded honour shamefully misplaced,
     And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
     And right perfection wrongfully disgraced,
     And strength by limping sway disabléd

     And art made tongue-tied by authority,
     And folly, doctor-like, controlling skill,
     And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
     And captive Good attending captain Ill:—

     —Tired with all these, from these would I be gone,
     Save that, to die, I leave my Love alone.

     W. SHAKESPEARE.


     61. SAINT JOHN BAPTIST.

     The last and greatest Herald of Heaven's King
     Girt with rough skins, hies to the deserts wild,
     Among that savage brood the woods forth bring,
     Which he more harmless found than man, and mild.

     His food was locusts, and what there doth spring
     With honey that from virgin hives distill'd;
     Parch'd body, hollow eyes, some uncouth thing
     Made him appear, long since from earth exiled.

     There burst he forth: All ye whose hopes rely
     On God, with me amidst these deserts mourn,
     Repent, repent, and from old errors turn!
     —Who listen'd to his voice, obey'd his cry?

     Only the echoes, which he made relent,
     Rung from their flinty caves, Repent! Repent!

     W. DRUMMOND.

     62. ODE ON THE MORNING OF CHRIST'S NATIVITY.

     This is the month, and this the happy morn
     Wherein the Son of Heaven's Eternal King
     Of wedded maid and virgin mother born,
     Our great redemption from above did bring;
     For so the holy sages once did sing
     That He our deadly forfeit should release,
     And with His Father work us a perpetual peace.

     That glorious Form, that Light unsufferable,
     And that far-beaming blaze of Majesty
     Wherewith He wont at Heaven's high council-table
     To sit the midst of Trinal Unity,
     He laid aside; and, here with us to be,
     Forsook the courts of everlasting day,
     And chose with us a darksome house of mortal clay.

     Say, heavenly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein
     Afford a present to the Infant God?
     Hast thou no verse, no hymn, or solemn strain
     To welcome Him to this His new abode,
     Now while the heaven, by the sun's team untrod,
     Hath took no print of the approaching light,
     And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright?

     See how from far, upon the eastern road,
     The star-led wizards haste with odours sweet:
     O run, prevent them with thy humble ode
     And lay it lowly at his blessed feet;
     Have thou the honour first thy Lord to greet,
     And join thy voice unto the angel quire
     From out His secret altar touch'd with hallow'd fire.

                 THE HYMN.

     It was the Winter wild
     While the heaven-born Child
     All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies
     Nature in awe to Him
     Had doff'd her gaudy trim,
     With her great Master so to sympathise:
     It was no season then for her
     To wanton with the sun, her lusty paramour.

     Only with speeches fair
     She woos the gentle air
     To hide her guilty front with innocent snow;
     And on her naked shame,
     Pollute with sinful blame,
     The saintly veil of maiden white to throw;
     Confounded, that her Maker's eyes
     Should look so near upon her foul deformities.

     But He, her fears to cease,
     Sent down the meek-eyed Peace,
     She crown'd with olive green, came softly sliding
     Down through the turning sphere
     His ready harbinger,
     With turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing;
     And waving wide her myrtle wand,
     She strikes a universal peace through sea and land.

     No war, or battle's sound
     Was heard the world around:
     The idle spear and shield were high up hung;
     The hookéd Chariot stood
     Unstain'd with hostile blood;
     The trumpet spake not to the arméd throng;
     And kings sat still with awful eye,
     As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by.

     But peaceful was the night
     Wherin the Prince of Light
     His reign of peace upon the earth began:
     The winds, with wonder whist,
     Smoothly the waters kist
     Whispering new joys to the mild oceán—
     Who now hath quite forgot to rave,
     While birds of calm sit brooding on the charméd wave.

     The stars with deep amaze
     Stand fix'd in steadfast gaze,
     Bending one way their precious influence;
     And will not take their flight
     For all the morning light,
     Or Lucifer that often warn'd them thence;
     But in their glimmering orbs did glow,
     Until their Lord Himself bespake, and bid them go.

     And though the shady gloom
     Had given day her room,
     The sun himself withheld his wonted speed,
     And hid his head for shame,
     As his inferior flame
     The new-enlightn'd world no more should need:
     He saw a greater Sun appear
     Then his bright throne, or burning axletree, could bear.

     The shepherds on the lawn
     Or ere the point of dawn
     Sate simply chatting in a rustic row;
     Full little thought they then
     That the mighty Pan
     Was kindly come to live with them below;
     Perhaps their loves, or else their sheep
     Was all that did their silly thoughts so busy keep.

     When such music sweet
     Their hearts and ears did greet
     As never was by mortal finger strook—
     Divinely-warbled voice
     Answering the stringéd noise,
     As all their souls in blissful rapture took:
     The air, such pleasure loth to lose,
     With thousand echoes still prolongs each heavenly close.

     Nature that heard such sound
     Beneath the hollow round
     Of Cynthia's seat the airy region thrilling,
     Now was almost won
     To think her part was done,
     And that her reign had here its last fulfilling;
     She knew such harmony alone
     Could hold all heaven and earth in happier union.

     At last surrounds their sight
     A globe of circular light
     That with long beams the shamefaced night array'd;
     The helméd Cherubim
     And sworded Seraphim,
     Are seen in glittering ranks with wings display'd,
     Harping in loud and solemn quire
     With unexpressive notes, to Heaven's new-born Heir.

     Such music (as 'tis said)
     Before was never made
     But when of old the sons of morning sung,
     While the Creator great
     His constellations set
     And the well-balanced world on hinges hung;
     And cast the dark foundations deep,
     And bid the weltering waves their oozy channel keep.

     Ring out, ye crystal spheres!
     Once bless our human ears,
     If ye have power to touch our senses so;
     And let your silver chime
     Move in melodious time;
     And let the bass of heaven's deep organ blow;
     And with your ninefold harmony
     Make up full concert to the angelic symphony.

     For if such holy Song
     Enwrap our fancy long,
     Time will run back, and fetch the age of gold;
     And speckled vanity
     Will sicken soon and die,
     And leprous sin will melt from earthly mould;
     And Hell itself will pass away,
     And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day.

     Yea, Truth and Justice then
     Will down return to men,
     Orb'd in a rainbow; and, like glories wearing,
     Mercy will sit between
     Throned in celestial sheen,
     With radiant feet the tissued clouds down steering;
     And Heaven, as at some festival,
     Will open wide the gates of her high palace hall.

     But wisest Fate says No;
     This must not yet be so;
     The Babe yet lies in smiling infancy
     That on the bitter cross
     Must redeem our loss;
     So both Himself and us to glorify:
     Yet first to those ychain'd in sleep
     The wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep;

     With such a horrid clang
     As on mount Sinai rang
     While the red fire and smouldering clouds outbrake:
     The aged Earth agast
     With terrour of that blast
     Shall from the surface to the centre shake,
     When at the worlds last sessión,
     The dreadful Judge in middle air shall spread His throne.

     And then at last our bliss
     Full and perfect is,
     But now begins; for from this happy day
     The old Dragon, under ground
     In straiter limits bound,
     Not half so far casts his usurpéd sway;
     And, wroth to see his Kingdom fail,
     Swinges the scaly horrour of his folded tail.

     The oracles are dumb;
     No voice or hideous hum
     Runs through the archéd roof in words deceiving:
     Apollo from his shrine
     Can no more divine,
     With hollow shriek the steep of Delphos leaving:
     No nightly trance or breathéd spell
     Inspires the pale-eyed priest from the prophetic cell.

     The lonely mountains o'er
     And the resounding shore
     A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament;
     From haunted spring, and dale
     Edged with poplar pale
     The parting Genius is with sighing sent;
     With flower-inwoven tresses torn
     The nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.

     In consecrated earth
     And on the holy hearth,
     The Lars and Lemurés moan with midnight plaint;
     In urns, and altars round
     A drear and dying sound
     Affrights the Flamens at their service quaint;
     And the chill marble seems to sweat,
     While each peculiar Power forgoes his wonted seat.

     Peor and Baalim
     Forsake their temples dim,
     With that twice-batter'd god of Palestine
     And moonéd Ashtaroth
     Heaven's queen and mother both,
     Now sits not girt with tapers' holy shine;
     The Lybic Hammon shrinks his horn,
     In vain the Tyrian maids their wounded Thammuz mourn.

     And sullen Moloch, fled,
     Hath left in shadows dread
     His burning idol all of blackest hue;
     In vain with cymbals' ring
     They call the grisly king,
     In dismal dance about the furnace blue;
     The brutish gods of Nile as fast
     Isis and Orus, and the dog Anubis, haste.

     Nor is Osiris seen
     In Memphian grove, or green,
     Trampling the unshower'd grass with lowings loud:
     Nor can he be at rest
     Within his sacred chest;
     Naught but profoundest hell can be his shroud;
     In vain with timbrell'd anthems dark
     The sable stoléd sorcerers bear his worshipt ark.

     He feels from Juda's land
     The dreaded infant's hand;
     The rays of Bethlehem blind his dusky eyn;
     Nor all the gods beside
     Longer dare abide,
     Nor Typhon huge ending in snaky twine:
     Our Babe, to shew his Godhead true,
     Can in his swaddling bands control the damnéd crew.

     So, when the sun in bed
     Curtain'd with cloudy red
     Pillows his chin upon an orient wave,
     The flocking shadows pale
     Troop to the infernal jail,
     Each fetter'd ghost slips to his several grave;
     And the yellow-skirted fays
     Fly after the night-steeds, leaving their moon-loved maze.

     But see, the Virgin blest
     Hath laid her Babe to rest;
     Time is, our tedious song should here have ending:
     Heavens youngest-teeméd star,
     Hath fixed her polish'd car,
     Her sleeping Lord with hand-maid lamp attending:
     And all about the courtly stable
     Bright-harness'd angels sit in order serviceable.

     J. MILTON.


     63. SONG FOR ST CECILIA'S DAY,

                  1687.

     From Harmony, from heavenly Harmony
       This universal frame began:
      When nature underneath a heap
       Of jarring atoms lay
      And could not heave her head,
     The tuneful voice was heard from high
       Arise, ye more than dead!
     Then cold, and hot, and moist, and dry
     In order to their stations leap,
       And Music's power obey.
     From harmony, from heavenly harmony
       This universal frame began:
       From harmony to harmony
     Through all the compass of the notes it ran,
     The diapason closing full in Man.

     What passion cannot Music raise and quell?
       When Jubal struck the chorded shell
      His listening brethren stood around,
      And, wondering, on their faces fell
      To worship that celestial sound.
     Less than a God they thought there could not dwell
       Within the hollow of that shell,
       That spoke so sweetly and so well.
     What passion cannot Music raise and quell?

      The trumpet's loud clangor
       Excites us to arms,
      With shrill notes of anger,
       And mortal alarms.
      The double double double beat
       Of the thundering drum
       Cries "Hark! the foes come;
     Charge, charge, 'tis too late to retreat!"

      The soft complaining flute
      In dying notes discovers
      The woes of hopeless lovers,
     Whose dirge is whisper'd by the warbling lute.

      Sharp violins proclaim
     Their jealous pangs and desperation,
     Fury, frantic indignation,
     Depth of pains, and height of passion
      For the fair, disdainful dame.

     But oh! what art can teach,
     What human voice can reach
      The sacred organ's praise?
     Notes inspiring holy love,
     Notes that wing their heavenly ways
      To mend the choirs above.
     Orpheus could lead the savage race,
     And trees uprooted left their place
      Sequacious of the lyre:
     But bright Cecilia raised the wonder higher:
     When to her Organ vocal breath was given
     An angel heard, and straight appear'd—
      Mistaking Earth for Heaven!

              Grand Chorus:

     As from the power of sacred lays
      The spheres began to move,
     And sung the great Creator's praise
      To all the blest above;
     So when the last and dreadful hour
     This crumbling pageant shall devour,
     The trumpet shall be heard on high,
     The dead shall live, the living die,
     And Music shall untune the sky.

     J. DRYDEN.


     64. ON THE LATE MASSACRE IN PIEMONT.

     Avenge, O Lord! Thy slaughter'd Saints, whose bones
     Lie scatter'd on the Alpine mountains cold;
     Even them who kept Thy truth so pure of old
     When all our fathers worshipt stocks and stones.

     Forget not: In Thy book record their groans
     Who were Thy sheep, and in their ancient fold
     Slain by the bloody Piemontese, that roll'd
     Mother with infant down the rocks. Their moans

     The vales redoubled to the hills, and they
     To Heaven. Their martyr'd blood and ashes sow
     O'er all the Italian field, where still doth sway
     The triple tyrant, that from these may grow
     A hundred-fold, who, having learnt Thy way,
     Early may fly the Babylonian woe.

     J. MILTON.


     65. HORATIAN ODE UPON CROMWELL'S RETURN FROM IRELAND.

       The forward youth that would appear,
       Must now forsake his Muses dear,
          Nor in the shadows sing
          His numbers languishing.

       'Tis time to leave the books in dust,
       And oil the unused armour's rust,
          Removing from the wall
          The corslet of the hall.

       So restless Cromwell could not cease
       In the inglorious arts of peace,
          But through adventurous war
          Urgéd his active star:

       And like the three-fork'd lightning first
       Breaking the clouds where it was nurst,
          Did thorough his own side
          His fiery way divide:

       For 'tis all one to courage high
       The emulous, or enemy;
          And with such, to enclose
          Is more than to oppose;

       Then burning through the air he went
       And palaces and temples rent;
          And Caesar's head at last
          Did through his laurels blast.

       'Tis madness to resist or blame
       The face of angry heaven's flame;
          And if we would speak true,
          Much to the Man is due

       Who, from his private gardens, where
       He lived reservéd and austere
          (As if he his highest plot
          To plant the bergamot)

       Could by industrious valour climb
       To ruin the great work of time,
          And cast the Kingdoms old
          Into another mould.

       Though Justice against Fate complain,
       And plead the ancient Rights in vain—
          But those do hold or break
          As men are strong or weak;

       Nature, that hateth emptiness,
       Allows of penetration less,
          And therefore must make room
          Where greater spirits come.

       What field of all the civil war
       Where his were not the deepest scar?
          And Hampton shows what part
          He had of wiser art,

       Where, twining subtle fears with hope,
       He wove a net of such a scope
          That Charles himself might chase
          To Carisbrook's narrow case;

       That thence the Royal actor borne
       The tragic scaffold might adorn:
          While round the arméd bands
          Did clap their bloody hands;

       He nothing common did or mean
       Upon that memorable scene,
          But with his keener eye
          The axe's edge did try;

       Nor call'd the Gods, with vulgar spite,
       To vindicate his helpless right;
          But bow'd his comely head
          Down, as upon a bed.

       —This was that memorable hour
       Which first assured the forcéd power:
          So when they did design
          The Capitol's first line,

       A Bleeding Head, where they begun,
       Did fright the architects to run;
          And yet in that the State
          Foresaw its happy fate!

       And now the Irish are ashamed
       To see themselves in one year tamed:
          So much one man can do
          That does both act and know.

       They can affirm his praises best,
       And have, though overcome, confest
          How good he is, how just
          And fit for highest trust;

       Nor yet grown stiffer with command,
       But still in the Republic's hand—
          How fit he is to sway
          That can so well obey!

       He to the Commons' feet presents
       A Kingdom for his first year's rents,
          And (what he may) forbears
          His fame, to make it theirs:

       And has his sword and spoils ungirt
       To lay them at the Public's skirt.
          So when the falcon high
          Falls heavy from the sky,

       She, having kill'd, no more doth search
       But on the next green bough to perch,
          Where, when he first does lure,
          The falconer has her sure.

       —What may not then our Isle presume
       While victory his crest does plume?
          What may not others fear
          If thus he crowns each year!

       As Caesar he, ere long, to Gaul,
       To Italy an Hannibal,
          And to all states not free
          Shall climacteric be.

       The Pict no shelter now shall find
       Within his parti-colour'd mind,
          But, from this valour, sad
          Shrink underneath the plaid—

       Happy, if in the tufted brake
       The English hunter him mistake,
          Nor lay his hounds in near
          The Caledonian deer.

       But Thou, the War's and Fortune's son,
       March indefatigably on;
          And for the last effect
          Still keep the sword erect:

       Besides the force it has to fright
       The spirits of the shady night,
          The same arts that did gain
          A power, must it maintain.

     A. MARVELL.


     66. LYCIDAS

     Elegy on a Friend drowned in the Irish Channel.

     Yet once more, O ye laurels, and once more
     Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere,
     I come to pluck your berries harsh and crude,
     And with forced fingers rude
     Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year.
     Bitter constraint, and sad occasion dear
     Compels me to disturb your season due:
     For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime,
     Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer:
     Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew
     Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme.
     He must not float upon his watery bier
     Unwept, and welter to the parching wind,
     Without the meed of some melodious tear.

       Begin, then, Sisters of the sacred well
     That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring;
     Begin, and somewhat loudly sweep the string;
     Hence with denial vain and coy excuse:
     So may some gentle Muse
     With lucky words favour my destined urn:
     And as he passes, turn
     And bid fair peace be to my sable shroud.

       For we were nursed upon the self-same hill,
     Fed the same flock by fountain, shade, and rill:
     Together both, ere the high lawns appear'd
     Under the opening eye-lids of the morn,
     We drove a-field, and both together heard
     What time the gray-fly winds her sultry horn,
     Battening our flocks with the fresh dews of night,
     Oft till the star that rose at evening bright
     Toward heaven's descent had sloped his westering wheel.
     Meanwhile the rural ditties were not mute;
     Temper'd to the oaten flute,
     Rough Satyrs danced, and Fauns with cloven heel
     From the glad sound would not be absent long;
     And old Damoetas loved to hear our song.

       But, O the heavy change, now thou art gone,
     Now thou art gone and never must return!
     Thee, Shepherd, thee the woods, and desert caves,
     With wild thyme and the gadding vine o'ergrown,
     And all their echoes, mourn.
     The willows and the hazel copses green
     Shall now no more be seen
     Fanning their joyous leaves to thy soft lays:—
     As killing as the canker to the rose,
     Or taint-worm to the weanling herds that graze,
     Or frost to flowers, that their gay wardrobe wear,
     When first the white-thorn blows;
     Such, Lycidas, thy loss to shepherds' ear.

       Where were ye, Nymphs, when the remorseless deep
     Closed o'er the head of your loved Lycidas?
     For neither were ye playing on the steep
     Where your old bards, the famous Druids, lie,
     Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high,
     Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard stream.
     Ay me! I fondly dream—
     Had ye been there—for what could that have done?
     What could the Muse herself that Orpheus bore,
     The Muse herself, for her enchanting son,
     Whom universal nature did lament,
     When by the rout that made the hideous roar
     His gory visage down the stream was sent,
     Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore?

       Alas! what boots it with incessant care
     To tend the homely, slighted, shepherd's trade
     And strictly meditate the thankless Muse?
     Were it not better done, as others use,
     To sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
     Or with the tangles of Neaera's hair?
     Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise
     (That last infirmity of noble mind)
     To scorn delights and live laborious days;
     But the fair guerdon when we hope to find,
     And think to burst out into sudden blaze,
     Comes the blind Fury with the abhorréd shears
     And slits the thin-spun life. "But not the praise,"
     Phoebus replied, and touch'd my trembling ears;
     "Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil,
     Nor in the glistering foil
     Set off to the world, nor in broad rumour lies:
     But lives and spreads aloft by those pure eyes
     And perfect witness of all-judging Jove;
     As he pronounces lastly on each deed,
     Of so much fame in heaven expect thy meed."

       O fountain Arethuse, and thou honour'd flood
     Smooth-sliding Mincius, crown'd with vocal reeds!
     That strain I heard was of a higher mood:
     But now my oat proceeds,
     And listens to the herald of the sea
     That came in Neptune's plea;
     He ask'd the waves, and ask'd the felon winds,
     What hard mishap hath doom'd this gentle swain?
     And question'd every gust of rugged wings
     That blows from off each beakéd promontory:
     They knew not of his story;
     And sage Hippotadés their answer brings,
     That not a blast was from his dungeon stray'd;
     The air was calm, and on the level brine
     Sleek Panopé with all her sisters play'd.
     It was that fatal and perfidious bark
     Built in the eclipse, and rigg'd with curses dark,
     That sunk so low that sacred head of thine.

       Next, Camus, reverend sire, went footing slow,
     His mantle hairy, and his bonnet sedge
     Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge
     Like to that sanguine flower inscribed with woe:
     "Ah! who hath reft," quoth he, "my dearest pledge!"
     Last came, and last did go
     The pilot of the Galilean Lake;
     Two massy keys he bore of metals twain
     (The golden opes, the iron shuts amain);
     He shook his mitred locks, and stern bespake:
     "How well could I have spared for thee, young swain,
     Enow of such, as for their bellies' sake
     Creep and intrude and climb into the fold!
     Of other care they little reckoning make
     Than how to scramble at the shearers' feast,
     And shove away the worthy bidden guest;
     Blind mouths! that scarce themselves know how to hold
     A sheep-hook, or have learn'd aught else the least
     That to the faithful herdman's art belongs!
     What recks it them? What need they? They are sped;
     And, when they list, their lean and flashy songs
     Grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw;
     The hungry sheep look up, and are not fed,
     But, swoln with wind and the rank mist they draw
     Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread:
     Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw
     Daily devours apace, and nothing said:
     —But that two-handed engine at the door
     Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more."

       Return, Alphéus; the dread voice is past
     That shrunk thy streams; return, Sicilian Muse,
     And call the vales, and bid them hither cast
     Their bells and flowerets of a thousand hues.
     Ye valleys low, where the mild whispers use
     Of shades, and wanton winds, and gushing brooks
     On whose fresh lap the swart star sparely looks;
     Throw hither all your quaint enamell'd eyes
     That on the green turf suck the honey'd showers
     And purple all the ground with vernal flowers.
     Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies,
     The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine,
     The white pink, and the pansy freak'd with jet,
     The glowing violet,
     The musk-rose, and the well-attired woodbine,
     With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head,
     And every flower that sad embroidery wears:
     Bid amaranthus all his beauty shed,
     And daffodillies fill their cups with tears
     To strew the laureate hearse where Lycid lies.
     For so to interpose a little ease,
     Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise;
     Ay me! whilst thee the shores and sounding seas
     Wash far away,—where'er thy bones are hurl'd;
     Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides
     Where thou perhaps, under the whelming tide
     Visitest the bottom of the monstrous world;
     Or whether thou, to our moist vows denied,
     Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old,
     Where the great Vision of the guarded mount
     Looks toward Namancos and Bayona's hold,
     —Look homeward, Angel, now, and melt with ruth:
     —And, O ye dolphins, waft the hapless youth!

       Weep no more, woeful shepherds, weep no more,
     For Lycidas, your sorrow, is not dead,
     Sunk though he be beneath the watery floor;
     So sinks the day-star in the ocean-bed,
     And yet anon repairs his drooping head
     And tricks his beams, and with new-spangled ore
     Flames in the forehead of the morning sky:
     So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high
     Through the dear might of Him that walk'd the waves;
     Where, other groves and other streams along,
     With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves,
     And hears the unexpressive nuptial song
     In the blest kingdoms meek of joy and love.
     There entertain him all the saints above
     In solemn troops, and sweet societies,
     That sing, and singing, in their glory move,
     And wipe the tears for ever from his eyes.
     Now, Lycidas, the shepherds weep no more;
     Henceforth thou art the Genius of the shore,
     In thy large recompense, and shalt be good
     To all that wander in that perilous flood.

       Thus sang the uncouth swain to the oaks and rills,
     While the still morn went out with sandals gray;
     He touch'd the tender stops of various quills,
     With eager thought warbling his Doric lay:
     And now the sun had stretch'd out all the hills,
     And now was dropt into the western bay:
     At last he rose, and twitch'd his mantle blue:
     To-morrow to fresh woods, and pastures new.

     J. MILTON.


     67. THE TOMBS IN WESTMINSTER ABBEY.

     Mortality, behold and fear
     What a change of flesh is here!
     Think how many royal bones
     Sleep within these heaps of stones;
     Here they lie, had realms and lands,
     Who now want strength to stir their hands,
     Where from their pulpits seal'd with dust
     They preach, "In greatness is no trust."
     Here's an acre sown indeed
     With the richest royallest seed
     That the earth did e'er suck in
     Since the first man died for sin:
     Here the bones of birth have cried
     "Though gods they were, as men they died!"
     Here are sands, ignoble things,
     Dropt from the ruin'd sides of kings
     Here's a world of pomp and state
     Buried in dust, once dead by fate.

     F. BEAUMONT.


     68. THE LAST CONQUEROR.

     Victorious men of earth, no more
       Proclaim how wide your empires are;
     Though you bind-in every shore
       And your triumphs reach as far
          As night and day,
       Yet you, proud monarchs, must obey
     And mingle with forgotten ashes, when
     Death calls ye to the crowd of common men.

     Devouring Famine, Plague, and War,
       Each able to undo mankind,
     Death's servile emissaries are;
       Nor to these alone confined,
          He hath at will
       More quaint and subtle ways to kill;
     A smile or kiss, as he will use the art,
     Shall have the cunning skill to break a heart.

     J. SHIRLEY.


     69. DEATH THE LEVELLER.

     The glories of our blood and state
        Are shadows, not substantial things;
     There is no armour against fate;
        Death lays his icy hand on kings:
          Sceptre and Crown
          Must tumble down,
     And in the dust be equal made
     With the poor crooked scythe and spade.

     Some men with swords may reap the field,
        And plant fresh laurels where they kill:
     But their strong nerves at last must yield;
        They tame but one another still:
          Early or late
          They stoop to fate,
     And must give up their murmuring breath
     When they, pale captives, creep to death.

     The garlands wither on your brow;
        Then boast no more your mighty deeds;
     Upon Death's purple altar now
        See where the victor-victim bleeds:
          Your heads must come
          To the cold tomb;
     Only the actions of the just
     Smell sweet, and blossom in their dust.

     J. SHIRLEY.


     70. WHEN THE ASSAULT WAS INTENDED TO THE CITY.

     Captain, or Colonel, or Knight in arms,
     Whose chance on these defenceless doors may seize,
     If deed of honour did thee ever please;
     Guard them, and him within protect from harms.

     He can requite thee; for he knows the charms
     That call fame on such gentle acts as these.
     And he can spread thy name o'er lands and seas,
     Whatever clime the sun's bright circle warms.

     Lift not thy spear against the Muses' bower:
     The great Emathian conqueror bid spare
     The house of Pindarus, when temple and tower
     Went to the ground: and the repeated air
     Of sad Electra's poet had the power
     To save the Athenian walls from ruin bare.

     J. MILTON.


     71. ON HIS BLINDNESS.

     When I consider how my light is spent
     Ere half my days, in this dark world and wide,
     And that one talent which is death to hide
     Lodged with me useless, though my soul more bent

     To serve therewith my Maker, and present
     My true account, lest He returning chide,—
     Doth God exact day-labour, light denied?
     I fondly ask:—But Patience, to prevent

     That murmur, soon replies; God doth not need
     Either man's work, or His own gifts: who best
     Bear His mild yoke, they serve Him best: His state

     Is kingly; thousands at His bidding speed
     And post o'er land and ocean without rest:—
     They also serve who only stand and wait.

     J. MILTON.


     72. CHARACTER OF A HAPPY LIFE.

     How happy is he born and taught
     That serveth not another's will;
     Whose armour is his honest thought
     And simple truth his utmost skill!

     Whose passions not his masters are,
     Whose soul is still prepared for death,
     Not tied unto the world by care
     Of public fame, or private breath;

     Who envies none that chance doth raise
     Or vice; Who never understood
     How deepest wounds are given by praise;
     Nor rules of state, but rules of good:

     Who hath his life from rumours freed,
     Whose conscience is his strong retreat;
     Whose state can neither flatterers feed,
     Nor ruin make accusers great;

     Who God doth late and early pray
     More of His grace than gifts to lend;
     And entertains the harmless day
     With a well-chosen book or friend;

     —This man is freed from servile bands
     Of hope to rise, or fear to fall;
     Lord of himself, though not of lands,
     And having nothing, yet hath all.

     SIR H. WOTTON.


     73. THE NOBLE NATURE.

        It is not growing like a tree
        In bulk, doth make Man better be;
     Or standing long an oak, three hundred year,
     To fall a log at last, dry, bald, and sere:
          A lily of a day
          Is fairer far in May,
        Although it fall and die that night—
        It was the plant and flower of Light.
     In small proportions we just beauties see;
     And in short measures life may perfect be.

     B. JONSON


     74. THE GIFTS OF GOD.

         When God at first made Man,
     Having a glass of blessings standing by;
     Let us (said he) pour on him all we can:
     Let the world's riches, which disperséd lie,
         Contract into a span.

         So strength first made a way;
     Then beauty flow'd, then wisdom, honour, pleasure:
     When almost all was out, God made a stay,
     Perceiving that alone, of all his treasure,
         Rest in the bottom lay.

         For if I should (said he)
     Bestow this jewel also on my creature,
     He would adore My gifts instead of Me,
     And rest in Nature, not the God of Nature:
         So both should losers be.

         Yet let him keep the rest,
     But keep them with repining restlessness:
     Let him be rich and weary, that at least,
     If goodness lead him not, yet weariness
         May toss him to my breast.

     G. HERBERT.


     75. THE RETREAT.

     Happy those early days, when I
     Shined in my Angel-infancy!
     Before I understood this place
     Appointed for my second race,
     Or taught my soul to fancy aught
     But a white, celestial thought;
     When yet I had not walk'd above
     A mile or two from my first Love,

     And looking back, at that short space
     Could see a glimpse of his bright face;
     When on some gilded cloud or flower
     My gazing soul would dwell an hour,
     And in those weaker glories spy
     Some shadows of eternity;
     Before I taught my tongue to wound
     My conscience with a sinful sound,
     Or had the black art to dispense
     A several sin to every sense,
     But felt through all this fleshly dress
     Bright shoots of everlastingness.

     O how I long to travel back,
     And tread again that ancient track!
     That I might once more reach that plain,
     Where first I left my glorious train;
     From whence th' enlighten'd spirit sees
     That shady City of Palm trees!
     But ah! my soul with too much stay
     Is drunk, and staggers in the way:—
     Some men a forward motion love,
     But I by backward steps would move;
     And when this dust falls to the urn,
     In that state I came, return.

     H. VAUGHAN.


     76. TO MR. LAWRENCE.

     Lawrence, of virtuous father virtuous son,
     Now that the fields are dank and ways are mire,
     Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire
     Help waste a sullen day, what may be won

     From the hard season gaining? Time will run
     On smoother, till Favonius re-inspire
     The frozen earth, and cloth in fresh attire
     The lily and rose, that neither sow'd nor spun.

     What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice,
     Of Attic taste, with wine, whence we may rise
     To hear the lute well touch'd, or artful voice

     Warble immortal notes and Tuscan air?
     He who of those delights can judge, and spare
     To interpose them oft, is not unwise.

     J. MILTON.


     77. TO CYRIACK SKINNER.

     Cyriack, whose grandsire on the royal bench
     Of British Themis, with no mean applause
     Pronounced, and in his volumes taught, our laws,
     Which others at their bar so often wrench;

     To-day deep thoughts resolve with me to drench
     In mirth, that after no repenting draws;
     Let Euclid rest and Archimedes pause,
     And what the Swede intends, and what the French.

     To measure life learn thou betimes, and know
     Toward solid good what leads the nearest way;
     For other things mild Heaven a time ordains,

     And disapproves that care, though wise in show,
     That with superfluous burden loads the day,
     And, when God sends a cheerful hour, refrains.

     J. MILTON.


     78. HYMN TO DIANA.

     Queen and Huntress, chaste and fair,
        Now the sun is laid to sleep,
     Seated in thy silver chair
        State in wonted manner keep:
          Hesperus entreats thy light,
          Goddess excellently bright.

     Earth, let not thy envious shade
        Dare itself to interpose;
     Cynthia's shining orb was made
        Heaven to clear when day did close;
          Bless us then with wishéd sight,
          Goddess excellently bright.

     Lay thy bow of pearl apart
        And thy crystal-shining quiver;
     Give unto the flying hart
        Space to breathe, how short soever;
          Thou that mak'st a day of night,
          Goddess excellently bright.

     B. JONSON.


     79. WISHES FOR THE SUPPOSED MISTRESS.

     Whoe'er she be,
     That not impossible She
     That shall command my heart and me;

     Where'er she lie,
     Lock'd up from mortal eye
     In shady leaves of destiny:

     Till that ripe birth
     Of studied Fate stand forth,
     And teach her fair steps to our earth;

     Till that divine
     Idea take a shrine
     Of crystal flesh, through which to shine:

     —Meet you her, my Wishes,
     Bespeak her to my blisses,
     And be ye call'd, my absent kisses.

     I wish her beauty,
     That owes not all its duty
     To gaudy tire, or glist'ring shoe-tie:

     Something more than
     Taffata or tissue can,
     Or rampant feather, or rich fan.

     A face that's best
     By its own beauty drest,
     And can alone command the rest:

     A face made up
     Out of no other shop
     Than what Nature's white hand sets ope.

     Sydneian showers
     Of sweet discourse, whose powers
     Can crown old Winter's head with flowers.

     Whate'er delight
     Can make day's forehead bright
     Or give down to the wings of night.

     Soft silken hours,
     Open suns, shady bowers;
     'Bove all, nothing within that lowers.

     Days, that need borrow
     No part of their good morrow
     From a fore-spent night of sorrow:

     Days, that in spite
     Of darkness, by the light
     Of a clear mind are day all night.

     Life, that dares send
     A challenge to his end,
     And when it comes, say, "Welcome friend."

     I wish her store
     Of worth may leave her poor
     Of wishes; and I wish—no more.

     —Now, if Time knows
     That Her, whose radiant brows
     Weave them a garland of my vows;

     Her that dares be
     What these lines wish to see;
     I seek no further, it is She.

     'Tis She, and here
     Lo! I unclothe and clear
     My wishes' cloudy character.

     Such worth as this is
     Shall fix my flying wishes,
     And determine them to kisses.

     Let her full glory,
     My fancies, fly before ye;
     Be ye my fictions:—but her story.

     R. CRASHAW.


     80. THE GREAT ADVENTURER.

        Over the mountains
        And over the waves,
        Under the fountains
        And under the graves;
        Under floods that are deepest,
        Which Neptune obey;
        Over rocks that are steepest
        Love will find out the way.

        When there is no place
        For the glow-worm to lie;
        When there is no space
        For receipt of a fly;
        When the midge dares not venture
        Lest herself fast she lay;
        If Love come, he will enter
        And will find out his way.

        You may esteem him
        A child for his might;
        Or you may deem him
        A coward from his flight;
        But if she whom love doth honour
        Be conceal'd from the day,
        Set a thousand guards upon her,
        Love will find out the way.

        Some think to lose him
        By having him confined;
        And some do suppose him,
        Poor thing, to be blind;
        But if ne'er so close ye wall him,
        Do the best that you may,
        Blind love, if so ye call him,
        Will find out his way.

        You may train the eagle
        To stoop to your fist;
        Or you may inveigle
        The phoenix of the east;
        The lioness, ye may move her
        To give o'er her prey;
        But you'll ne'er stop a lover:
        He will find out his way.

     ANON.


     81. CHILD AND MAIDEN.

     Ah, Chloris! could I now but sit
       As unconcern'd as when
     Your infant beauty could beget
       No happiness or pain!
     When I the dawn used to admire,
       And praised the coming day,
     I little thought the rising fire
       Would take my rest away.

     Your charms in harmless childhood lay
       Like metals in a mine;
     Age from no face takes more away
       Than youth conceal'd in thine.
     But as your charms insensibly
       To their perfection prest,
     So love as unperceived did fly,
       And center'd in my breast.

     My passion with your beauty grew,
       While Cupid at my heart
     Still as his mother favour'd you,
       Threw a new flaming dart:
     Each gloried in their wanton part;
       To make a lover, he
     Employ'd the utmost of his art—
       To make a beauty, she.

     SIR C. SEDLEY.


     82. COUNSEL TO GIRLS.

     Gather ye rose-buds while ye may,
       Old Time is still a-flying:
     And this same flower that smiles to-day,
       To-morrow will be dying.

     The glorious Lamp of Heaven, the Sun,
       The higher he's a-getting
     The sooner will his race be run,
       And nearer he's to setting.

     That age is best which is the first,
       When youth and blood are warmer,
     But being spent, the worse, and worst
       Times, still succeed the former.

     Then be not coy, but use your time;
       And while ye may, go marry:
     For having lost but once your prime,
       You may for ever tarry.

     R. HERRICK.


     83. TO LUCASTA, ON GOING TO THE WARS.

     Tell me not, Sweet, I am unkind
       That from the nunnery
     Of thy chaste breast and quiet mind,
       To war and arms I fly.

     True, a new mistress now I chase,
       The first foe in the field;
     And with a stronger faith embrace
       A sword, a horse, a shield.

     Yet this inconstancy is such
       As you too shalt adore;
     I could not love thee, Dear, so much,
       Loved I not Honour more.

     COLONEL LOVELACE.


     84. ELIZABETH OF BOHEMIA.

     You meaner beauties of the night,
       Which poorly satisfy our eyes
     More by your number than your light,
       You common people of the skies,
     What are you, when the Moon shall rise?

     Ye violets that first appear,
       By your pure purple mantles known
     Like the proud virgins of the year
       As if the spring were all your own,—
     What are you, when the Rose is blown?

     You curious chanters of the wood
       That warble forth dame Nature's lays,
     Thinking your passions understood
       By your weak accents; what's your praise
     When Philomel her voice doth raise?

     So, when my Mistress shall be seen
       In sweetness of her looks and mind,
     By virtue first, then choice, a Queen,
       Tell me, if she were not design'd
     Th' eclipse and glory of her kind?

     SIR H. WOTTON.


     85. TO THE LADY MARGARET LEY.

     Daughter to that good earl, once President
     Of England's council and her treasury,
     Who lived in both, unstain'd with gold or fee,
     And left them both, more in himself content.

     Till the sad breaking of that parliament
     Broke him, as that dishonest victory
     At Chaeronia, fatal to liberty,
     Kill'd with report that old man eloquent;—

     Though later born than to have known the days
     Wherein your father flourish'd, yet by you,
     Madam, methinks I see him living yet;

     So well your words his noble virtues praise,
     That all both judge you to relate them true,
     And to possess them, honour'd Margaret.

     J. MILTON.


     86. THE LOVELINESS OF LOVE.

     It is not Beauty I demand,
     A crystal brow, the moon's despair,
     Nor the snow's daughter, a white hand,
     Nor mermaid's yellow pride of hair:

     Tell me not of your starry eyes,
     Your lips that seem on roses fed,
     Your breasts, where Cupid tumbling lies,
     Nor sleeps for kissing of his bed:—

     A bloomy pair of vermeil cheeks
     Like Hebe's in her ruddiest hours,
     A breath that softer music speaks
     Than summer winds a-wooing flowers,

     These are but gauds: nay what are lips?
     Coral beneath the ocean-stream,
     Whose brink when your adventurer slips
     Full oft he perisheth on them.

     And what are cheeks, but ensigns oft
     That wave hot youth to fields of blood?
     Did Helen's breast, though ne'er so soft,
     Do Greece or Ilium any good?

     Eyes can with baleful ardour burn;
     Poison can breathe, that erst perfumed;
     There's many a white hand holds an urn
     With lovers hearts to dust consumed.

     For crystal brows there's nought within;
     They are but empty cells for pride;
     He who the Syren's hair would win
     Is mostly strangled in the tide.

     Give me, instead of Beauty's bust,
     A tender heart, a loyal mind
     Which with temptation I would trust,
     Yet never link'd with error find,—

     One in whose gentle bosom I
     Could pour my secret heart of woes,
     Like the care-burthen'd honey-fly
     That hides his murmurs in the rose,—

     My earthly Comforter! whose love
     So indefeasible might be
     That, when my spirit wonn'd above,
     Hers could not stay, for sympathy.

     ANON.


     87. THE TRUE BEAUTY.

        He that loves a rosy cheek
         Or a coral lip admires,
        Or from star-like eyes doth seek
         Fuel to maintain his fires;
        As old Time makes these decay,
        So his flames must waste away.

        But a smooth and steadfast mind,
         Gentle thoughts, and calm desires,
        Hearts with equal love combined,
         Kindle never-dying fires:—
        Where these are not, I despise
        Lovely cheeks or lips or eyes.

     T. CAREW.


     88. TO DIANEME.

     Sweet, be not proud of those two eyes
     Which starlike sparkle in their skies;
     Nor be you proud, that you can see
     All hearts your captives; yours yet free:
     Be you not proud of that rich hair
     Which wantons with the lovesick air;
     Whenas that ruby which you wear,
     Sunk from the tip of your soft ear,
     Will last to be a precious stone,
     When all your world of beauty's gone.

     R. HERRICK.


     89.

       Go, lovely Rose!
     Tell her, that wastes her time and me,
       That now she knows,
     When I resemble her to thee,
     How sweet and fair she seems to be.

       Tell her that's young,
     And shuns to have her graces spied,
       That hadst thou sprung
     In deserts, where no men abide,
     Thou must have uncommended died.

       Small is the worth
     Of beauty from the light retired:
       Bid her come forth,
     Suffer herself to be desired,
     And not blush so to be admired.

       Then die! that she
     The common fate of all things rare
       May read in thee:
     How small a part of time they share
     That are so wondrous sweet and fair!

     E. WALLER.


     90. TO CELIA.

     Drink to me only with thine eyes,
       And I will pledge with mine;
     Or leave a kiss but in the cup
       And I'll not look for wine.
     The thirst that from the soul doth rise
       Doth ask a drink divine;
     But might I of Jove's nectar sup,
       I would not change for thine.

     I sent thee late a rosy wreath,
       Not so much honouring thee
     As giving it a hope that there
       It could not wither'd be;
     But thou thereon didst only breathe
       And sent'st it back to me;
     Since when it grows, and smells, I swear,
       Not of itself but thee!

     B. JONSON.


     91. CHERRY-RIPE.

     There is a garden in her face
       Where roses and white lilies blow;
     A heavenly paradise is that place,
       Wherein all pleasant fruits do grow;
     There cherries grow that none may buy,
     Till Cherry-Ripe themselves do cry.

     Those cherries fairly do enclose
       Of orient pearl a double row,
     Which when her lovely laughter shows,
       They look like rose-buds fill'd with snow:
     Yet them no peer nor prince can buy
     Till Cherry-Ripe themselves do cry.

     Her eyes like angels watch them still;
       Her brows like bended bows do stand,
     Threat'ning with piercing frowns to kill
       All that approach with eye or hand
     These sacred cherries to come nigh,
     —Till Cherry-Ripe themselves do cry!

     ANON.


     92. THE POETRY OF DRESS.

     I.

     A sweet disorder in the dress
     Kindles in clothes a wantonness:—
     A lawn about the shoulders thrown
     Into a fine distractión,—
     An erring lace, which here and there
     Enthrals the crimson stomacher,—
     A cuff neglectful, and thereby
     Ribbands to flow confusedly,—
     A winning wave, deserving note,
     In the tempestuous petticoat,—
     A careless shoe-string, in whose tie
     I see a wild civility;—
     Do more bewitch me, than when art
     Is too precise in every part.

     R. HERRICK.


     93.—II.

     Whenas in silks my Julia goes
     Then, then (methinks) how sweetly flows
     That liquefaction of her clothes.

     Next, when I cast mine eyes and see
     That brave vibration each way free;
     O how that glittering taketh me!

     R. HERRICK.


     94.—III.

     My Love in her attire doth shew her wit,
      It doth so well become her;
     For every season she hath dressings fit,
      For Winter, Spring, and Summer.
      No beauty she doth miss
      When all her robes are on
      But Beauty's self she is
      When all her robes are gone.

     ANON.


     95. ON A GIRDLE.

     That which her slender waist confined
     Shall now my joyful temples bind:
     No monarch but would give his crown
     His arms might do what this has done.

     It was my Heaven's extremest sphere,
     The pale which held that lovely deer:
     My joy, my grief, my hope, my love
     Did all within this circle move.

     A narrow compass! and yet there
     Dwelt all that's good, and all that's fair:
     Give me but what this ribband bound,
     Take all the rest the Sun goes round.

     E. WALLER.


     96. TO ANTHEA WHO MAY COMMAND HIM ANY THING.

     Bid me to live, and I will live
       Thy Protestant to be;
     Or bid me love, and I will give
       A loving heart to thee.

     A heart as soft, a heart as kind,
       A heart as sound and free
     As in the whole world thou canst find,
       That heart I'll give to thee.

     Bid that heart stay, and it will stay,
       To honour thy decree:
     Or bid it languish quite away,
       And 't shall do so for thee.

     Bid me to weep, and I will weep,
       While I have eyes to see:
     And having none, yet I will keep
       A heart to weep for thee.

     Bid me despair, and I'll despair,
       Under that cypress tree:
     Or bid me die, and I will dare
       E'en Death, to die for thee.

     Thou art my life, my love, my heart,
       The very eyes of me,
     And hast command of every part,
       To live and die for thee.

     R. HERRICK.


     97.

     Love not me for comely grace,
     For my pleasing eye or face,
     Nor for any outward part,
     No, nor for a constant heart,—
      For these may fail, or turn to ill,
       So thou and I shall sever:
     Keep, therefore, a true woman's eye,
     And love me still, but know not why—
      So hast thou the same reason still
       To doat upon me ever!

     ANON.


     98.

     Not, Celia, that I juster am
      Or better than the rest;
     For I would change each hour, like them,
      Were not my heart at rest.

     But I am tied to very thee
      By every thought I have;
     Thy face I only care to see,
      Thy heart I only crave.

     All that in woman is adored
      In thy dear self I find—
     For the whole sex can but afford
      The handsome and the kind.

     Why then should I seek further store,
      And still make love anew?
     When change itself can give no more,
      'Tis easy to be true.

     SIR C. SEDLEY.


     99. TO ALTHEA FROM PRISON.

     When Love with unconfinéd wings
      Hovers within my gates,
     And my divine Althea brings
      To whisper at the grates;
     When I lie tangled in her hair
      And fetter'd to her eye,
     The birds that wanton in the air
      Know no such liberty.

     When flowing cups run swiftly round
      With no allaying Thames,
     Our careless heads with roses crown'd,
      Our hearts with loyal flames;
     When thirsty grief in wine we steep,
      When healths and draughts go free—
     Fishes that tipple in the deep
      Know no such liberty.

     When, linnet-like confinéd, I
      With shriller throat shall sing
     The sweetness, mercy, majesty,
      And glories of my King;
     When I shall voice aloud how good
      He is, how great should be,
     Enlargéd winds, that curl the flood,
      Know no such liberty.

     Stone walls do not a prison make,
      Nor iron bars a cage;
     Minds innocent and quiet take
      That for an hermitage:
     If I have freedom in my love
      And in my soul am free,
     Angels alone, that soar above,
      Enjoy such liberty.

     COLONEL LOVELACE.


     100. TO LUCASTA, ON GOING BEYOND THE SEAS.

       If to be absent were to be
          Away from thee;
        Or that when I am gone
        You or I were alone;
       Then, my Lucasta, might I crave
     Pity from blustering wind, or swallowing wave.

       Though seas and land betwixt us both,
          Our faith and troth,
          Like separated souls,
        All time and space controls:
       Above the highest sphere we meet
     Unseen, unknown; and greet as Angels greet.

       So then we do anticipate
          Our after-fate,
        And are alive i' the skies,
        If thus our lips and eyes
       Can speak like spirits unconfined
     In Heaven, their earthy bodies left behind.

     COLONEL LOVELACE.


     101. ENCOURAGEMENTS TO A LOVER.

     Why so pale and wan, fond lover?
        Prythee, why so pale?
     Will, if looking well can't move her,
        Looking ill prevail?
        Prythee, why so pale?

     Why so dull and mute, young sinner?
        Prythee, why so mute?
     Will, when speaking well can't win her,
        Saying nothing do't?
        Prythee, why so mute?

     Quit, quit for shame! This will not move,
        This cannot take her;
     If of herself she will not love,
        Nothing can make her:
        The D——l take her!

     SIR J. SUCKLING.


     102. A SUPPLICATION.

         Awake, awake, my Lyre!
     And tell thy silent master's humble tale
         In sounds that may prevail;
       Sounds that gentle thoughts inspire:
         Though so exalted she
         And I so lowly be
     Tell her, such different notes make all thy harmony.

         Hark! how the strings awake:
     And, though the moving hand approach not near,
         Themselves with awful fear
       A kind of numerous trembling make.
         Now all thy forces try;
         Now all thy charms apply;
     Revenge upon her ear the conquests of her eye.

         Weak Lyre! thy virtue sure
     Is useless here, since thou art only found
         To cure, but not to wound,
       And she to wound, but not to cure.
         Too weak too wilt thou prove
         My passion to remove;
     Physic to other ills, thou'rt nourishment to love.

         Sleep, sleep again my Lyre!
     For thou canst never tell my humble tale
         In sounds that will prevail,
       Nor gentle thoughts in her inspire;
         All thy vain mirth lay by,
         Bid thy strings silent lie,
     Sleep, sleep again, my Lyre, and let thy master die.

     A. COWLEY.


     103. THE MANLY HEART.

     Shall I, wasting in despair,
     Die because a woman's fair?
     Or my cheeks make pale with care
     'Cause another's rosy are?
     Be she fairer than the day,
     Or the flowery meads in May—
       If she be not so to me,
       What care I how fair she be?

     Shall my foolish heart be pined
     'Cause I see a woman kind;
     Or a well disposéd nature
     Joinéd with a lovely feature?
     Be she meeker, kinder, than
     Turtle-dove or pelican,
       If she be not so to me,
       What care I how kind she be?

     Shall a woman's virtues move
     Me to perish for her love?
     Or her merit's value known
     Make me quite forget my own?
     Be she with that goodness blest
     Which may gain her name of Best;
       If she be not such to me,
       What care I how good she be?

     'Cause her fortune seems too high,
     Shall I play the fool and die?
     Those that bear a noble mind
     Where they want of riches find,
     Think what with them they would do
     Who without them dare to woo;
       And unless that mind I see,
       What care I how great she be?

     Great, or good, or kind, or fair,
     I will ne'er the more despair;
     If she love me, this believe,
     I will die ere she shall grieve;
     If she slight me when I woo,
     I can scorn and let her go;
       For if she be not for me,
       What care I for whom she be?

     G. WITHER.


     104. MELANCHOLY.

     Hence, all you vain delights,
     As short as are the nights
     Wherein you spend your folly
     There's naught in this life sweet
     If men were wise to see't,
     But only melancholy,
     O sweetest Melancholy!
     Welcome, folded arms and fixéd eyes,
     A sigh that piercing mortifies,
     A look that's fasten'd to the ground,
     A tongue chain'd up without a sound!
     Fountain-heads and pathless groves,
     Places which pale passion loves!
     Moonlight walks, when all the fowls
     Are warmly housed save bats and owls!
       A midnight bell, a parting groan!
       These are the sounds we feed upon;
     Then stretch our bones in a still gloomy valley;
     Nothing's so dainty sweet as lovely melancholy.

     J. FLETCHER.


     105. TO A LOCK OF HAIR.

     Thy hue, dear pledge, is pure and bright
     As in that well-remember'd night
     When first thy mystic braid was wove,
     And first my Agnes whisper'd love.

       Since then how often hast thou prest
     The torrid zone of this wild breast,
     Whose wrath and hate have sworn to dwell
     With the first sin that peopled hell;
     A breast whose blood's a troubled ocean,
     Each throb the earthquake's wild commotion!
     O if such clime thou canst endure
     Yet keep thy hue unstain'd and pure,
     What conquest o'er each erring thought
     Of that fierce realm had Agnes wrought!
     I had not wander'd far and wide
     With such an angel for my guide;
     Nor heaven nor earth could then reprove me
     If she had lived, and lived to love me.

     Not then this world's wild joys had been
     To me one savage hunting scene,
     My sole delight the headlong race,
     And frantic hurry of the chase;
     To start, pursue, and bring to bay,
     Rush in, drag down, and rend my prey,
     Then—from the carcase turn away!
     Mine ireful mood had sweetness tamed,
     And soothed each wound which pride inflamed:—
     Yes, God and man might now approve me
     If thou hadst lived, and lived to love me!

     SIR W. SCOTT.


     106. THE FORSAKEN BRIDE.

     O waly waly, up the bank,
       And waly waly down the brae,
     And waly waly yon burn-side
       Where I and my Love wont to gae!
     I leant my back unto an aik,
       I thought it was a trusty tree;
     But first it bow'd, and syne it brak,
       Sae my true Love did lichtly me.

     O waly waly, but love be bonny
       A little time while it is new;
     But when 'tis auld, it waxeth cauld,
       And fades awa' like morning dew.
     O wherefore should I busk my head?
       Or wherefore should I kame my hair?
     For my true Love has me forsook,
       And says he'll never loe me mair.

     Now Arthur-seat sall be my bed;
       The sheets sall ne'er be prest by me:
     Saint Anton's well sall be my drink,
       Since my true Love has forsaken me.
     Marti'mas wind, when wilt thou blaw
       And shake the green leaves aff the tree?
     O gentle Death, when wilt thou come?
       For of my life I am wearíe.

     'Tis not the frost, that freezes fell,
       Nor blawing snaw's inclemencie,
     'Tis not sic cauld that makes me cry,
       But my Love's heart grown cauld to me.
     When we came in by Glasgow town
       We were a comely sight to see;
     My Love was clad in the black velvét,
       And I mysell in cramasie.

     But had I wist, before I kist,
       That love had been sae ill to win,
     I had lockt my heart in a case of gowd
       And pinn'd it wi' a siller pin.
     And O! if my young babe were born,
       And set upon the nurse's knee,
     And I mysell were dead and gane,
       And the green grass growing over me!

     ANON.


     107. FAIR HELEN.

     I wish I were where Helen lies;
     Night and day on me she cries;
     O that I were where Helen lies
        On fair Kirconnell lea.

     Curst be the heart that thought the thought,
     And curst the hand that fired the shot,
     When in my arms burd Helen dropt,
        And died to succour me!

     O think na but my heart was sair,
     When my Love dropt down and spak nae mair!
     I laid her down wi' meikle care,
        On fair Kirconnell lea.

     As I went down the water side,
     None but my foe to be my guide,
     None but my foe to be my guide,
        On fair Kirconnell lea;

     I lighted down my sword to draw,
     I hackéd him in pieces sma',
     I hackéd him in pieces sma',
        For her sake that died for me.

     O Helen fair, beyond compare!
     I'll make a garland of thy hair
     Shall bind my heart for evermair
        Until the day I die.

     O that I were where Helen lies!
     Night and day on me she cries;
     Out of my bed she bids me rise,
        Says, "Haste, and come to me!"

     O Helen fair! O Helen chaste!
     If I were with thee, I were blest,
     Where thou lies low and takes thy rest
        On fair Kirconnell lea.

     I wish my grave were growing green,
     A winding-sheet drawn ower my een,
     And I in Helen's arms lying,
        On fair Kirconnell lea.

     I wish I were where Helen lies;
     Night and day on me she cries;
     And I am weary of the skies,
        Since my Love died for me.

     ANON.


     108. THE TWA CORBIES.

     As I was walking all alane
     I heard twa corbies making a mane;
     The tane unto the t'other say,
     "Where sall we gang and dine to-day?"

     "—In behint yon auld fail dyke,
     I wot there lies a new-slain Knight;
     And naebody kens that he lies there,
     But his hawk, his hound, and lady fair.

     "His hound is to the hunting gane,
     His hawk to fetch the wild-fowl hame,
     His lady's ta'en another mate,
     So we may mak our dinner sweet.

     "Ye'll sit on his white hause-bane,
     And I'll pick out his bonny blue een:
     Wi' ae lock o' his gowden hair
     We'll theek our nest when it grows bare.

     "Mony a one for him makes mane,
     But nane sall ken where he is gane;
     O'er his white banes, when they are bare,
     The wind sall blaw for evermair."

     ANON.


     109. TO BLOSSOMS.

     Fair pledges of a fruitful tree,
        Why do ye fall so fast?
        Your date is not so past,
     But you may stay yet here awhile
        To blush and gently smile,
          And go at last.

     What, were ye born to be
        An hour or half's delight;
        And so to bid good-night?
     'Twas pity Nature brought ye forth,
        Merely to show your worth,
          And lose you quite.

     But you are lovely leaves, where we
        May read how soon things have
        Their end, though ne'er so brave:
     And after they have shown their pride
        Like you, awhile, they glide
          Into the grave.

     R. HERRICK.


     110. TO DAFFODILS.

     Fair Daffodils, we weep to see
          You haste away so soon
     As yet the early-rising Sun
          Has not attain'd his noon.
               Stay, stay,
          Until the hasting day
               Has run
          But to the even-song;
     And, having pray'd together, we
          Will go with you along.

     We have short time to stay, as you,
          We have as short a Spring;
     As quick a growth to meet decay
          As you, or any thing.
               We die
          As your hours do, and dry
               Away
          Like to the summer's rain;
     Or as the pearls of morning's dew
          Ne'er to be found again.

     R. HERRICK.


     111. THOUGHTS IN A GARDEN.

     How vainly men themselves amaze
     To win the palm, the oak, or bays,
     And their incessant labours see
     Crown'd from some single herb or tree,
     Whose short and narrow-vergéd shade
     Does prudently their toils upbraid;
     While all the flowers and trees do close
     To weave the garlands of Repose.

     Fair Quiet, have I found thee here,
     And Innocence thy sister dear?
     Mistaken long, I sought you then
     In busy companies of men:
     Your sacred plants, if here below,
     Only among the plants will grow:
     Society is all but rude
     To this delicious solitude.

     No white nor red was ever seen
     So amorous as this lovely green.
     Fond lovers, cruel as their flame,
     Cut in these trees their mistress' name:
     Little, alas! they know or heed
     How far these beauties hers exceed!
     Fair trees! where'er your barks I wound,
     No name shall but your own be found.

     When we have run our passions' heat,
     Love hither makes his best retreat:
     The gods, who mortal beauty chase,
     Still in a tree did end their race:
     Apollo hunted Daphne so
     Only that she might laurel grow;
     And Pan did after Syrinx speed
     Not as a nymph, but for a reed.

     What wondrous life in this I lead!
     Ripe apples drop about my head;
     The luscious clusters of the vine
     Upon my mouth do crush their wine;
     The nectarine and curious peach
     Into my hands themselves do reach;
     Stumbling on melons, as I pass,
     Ensnared with flowers, I fall on grass.

     Meanwhile the mind from pleasure less
     Withdraws into its happiness;
     The mind, that ocean where each kind
     Does straight its own resemblance find;
     Yet it creates, transcending these,
     Far other worlds, and other seas;
     Annihilating all that's made
     To a green thought in a green shade.

     Here at the fountain's sliding foot
     Or at some fruit-tree's mossy root,
     Casting the body's vest aside
     My soul into the boughs does glide;
     There, like a bird, it sits and sings,
     Then whets and claps its silver wings,
     And, till prepared for longer flight,
     Waves in its plumes the various light.

     Such was that happy Garden-state
     While man there walk'd without a mate:
     After a place so pure and sweet,
     What other help could yet be meet!
     But 'twas beyond a mortal's share
     To wander solitary there:
     Two paradises are in one,
     To live in Paradise alone.

     How well the skilful gardener drew
     Of flowers and herbs this dial new!
     Where, from above, the milder sun
     Does through a fragrant zodiac run:
     And, as it works, th' industrious bee
     Computes its time as well as we.
     How could such sweet and wholesome hours
     Be reckon'd, but with herbs and flowers!

     A. MARVELL.


     112. L'ALLEGRO.

     Hence, loathéd Melancholy,
       Of Cerberus and blackest Midnight born
     In Stygian cave forlorn
       'Mongst horrid shapes, and shrieks, and sights unholy!
     Find out some uncouth cell
       Where brooding Darkness spreads his jealous wings
     And the night-raven sings;
       There, under ebon shades and low-browed rocks
     As ragged as thy locks,
       In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell.

         But come, thou Goddess fair and free,
         In heaven yclept Euphrosyne,
         And by men, heart-easing Mirth,
         Whom lovely Venus at a birth
         With two sister Graces more
         To ivy-crownéd Bacchus bore:
         Or whether (as some sager sing)
         The frolic wind that breathes the spring
         Zephyr, with Aurora playing,
         As he met her once a-Maying—
         There, on beds of violets blue
         And fresh-blown roses wash'd in dew
         Fill'd her with thee, a daughter fair,
         So buxom, blithe, and debonair.
         
           Haste thee, Nymph, and bring with thee
         Jest, and youthful jollity,
         Quips, and cranks, and wanton wiles,
         Nods, and becks, and wreathéd smiles
         Such as hang on Hebe's cheek,
         And love to live in dimple sleek;
         Sport that wrinkled Care derides,
         And Laughter holding both his sides:—
         Come, and trip it as you go
         On the light fantastic toe;
         And in thy right hand lead with thee
         The mountain-nymph, sweet Liberty;
         And if I give thee honour due,
         Mirth, admit me of thy crew,
         To live with her, and live with thee,
         In unreprovéd pleasures free;
         To hear the lark begin his flight
         And singing startle the dull night
         From his watch-tower in the skies,
         Till the dappled dawn doth rise:
         Then to come, in spite of sorrow,
         And at my window bid good-morrow,
         Through the sweetbriar, or the vine,
         Or the twisted eglantine:
         While the cock with lively din,
         Scatters the rear of darkness thin,
         And to the stack, or the barn-door,
         Stoutly struts his dames before:
         Oft listening how the hounds and horn
         Cheerly rouse the slumbering morn,
         From the side of some hoar hill,
         Through the high wood echoing shrill:
         Sometime walking, not unseen,
         By hedgerow elms, on hillocks green,
         Right against the eastern gate
         Where the great Sun begins his state
         Robed in flames and amber light,
         The clouds in thousand liveries dight;
         While the ploughman, near at hand,
         Whistles o'er the furrow'd land,
         And the milkmaid singeth blithe,
         And the mower whets his scythe,
         And every shepherd tells his tale
         Under the hawthorn in the dale.

           Straight mine eye hath caught new pleasures
         Whilst the landscape round it measures;
         Russet lawns, and fallows gray,
         Where the nibbling flocks do stray;
         Mountains, on whose barren breast
         The labouring clouds do often rest;
         Meadows trim with daisies pied;
         Shallow brooks, and rivers wide;
         Towers and battlements it sees
         Bosom'd high in tufted trees,
         Where perhaps some Beauty lies,
         The Cynosure of neighbouring eyes.

           Hard by, a cottage chimney smokes
         From betwixt two aged oaks,
         Where Corydon and Thyrsis, met
         Are at their savoury dinner set
         Of herbs, and other country messes,
         Which the neat-handed Phyllis dresses;
         And then in haste her bower she leaves
         With Thestylis to bind the sheaves;
         Or, if the earlier season lead,
         To the tann'd haycock in the mead.

           Sometimes with secure delight
         The upland hamlets will invite,
         When the merry bells ring round,
         And the jocund rebecks sound
         To many a youth and many a maid,
         Dancing in the chequer'd shade;
         And young and old come forth to play
         On a sun-shine holy-day,
         Till the live-long day-light fail:
         Then to the spicy nut-brown ale,
         With stories told of many a feat,
         How faery Mab the junkets eat;
         She was pinch'd and pull'd, she said;
         And he, by friar's lantern led,
         Tells how the drudging Goblin sweat
         To earn his cream-bowl duly set,
         When in one night, ere glimpse of morn,
         His shadowy flail hath thresh'd the corn
         That ten day-labourers could not end;
         Then lies him down the lubber fiend,
         And, stretch'd out all the chimney's length,
         Basks at the fire his hairy strength;
         And crop-full out of doors he flings,
         Ere the first cock his matin rings.

           Thus done the tales, to bed they creep,
         By whispering winds soon lull'd asleep.

           Tower'd cities please us then,
         And the busy hum of men,
         Where throngs of knights and barons bold,
         In weeds of peace high triumphs hold,
         With store of ladies, whose bright eyes
         Rain influence, and judge the prize
         Of wit or arms, while both contend
         To win her grace whom all commend.
         There let Hymen oft appear
         In saffron robe, with taper clear,
         And pomp, and feast, and revelry,
         With mask, and antique pageantry;
         Such sights as youthful poets dream
         On summer eves by haunted stream.
         Then to the well-trod stage anon,
         If Jonson's learned sock be on,
         Or sweetest Shakspeare, Fancy's child,
         Warble his native wood-notes wild.

           And ever against eating cares,
         Lap me in soft Lydian airs
         Married to immortal verse,
         Such as the meeting soul may pierce
         In notes, with many a winding bout
         Of linkéd sweetness long drawn out,
         With wanton heed and giddy cunning
         The melting voice through mazes running,
         Untwisting all the chains that tie
         The hidden soul of harmony;
         That Orpheus' self may heave his head
         From golden slumber, on a bed
         Of heap'd Elysian flowers, and hear
         Such strains as would have won the ear
         Of Pluto, to have quite set free
         His half-regain'd Eurydice.
           These delights if thou canst give,
         Mirth, with thee I mean to live.

     J. MILTON.


     113. IL PENSEROSO.

     Hence, vain deluding Joys,
       The brood of Folly without father bred!
     How little you bestead
       Or fill the fixéd mind with all your toys!
     Dwell in some idle brain,
       And fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess
     As thick and numberless
       As the gay motes that people the sunbeams,
     Or likest hovering dreams
       The fickle pensioners of Morpheus' train.

           But hail, thou goddess sage and holy,
         Hail, divinest Melancholy!
         Whose saintly visage is too bright
         To hit the sense of human sight,
         And therefore to our weaker view
         O'erlaid with black, staid Wisdom's hue;
         Black, but such as in esteem
         Prince Memnon's sister might beseem.
         Or that starr'd Ethiop queen that strove
         To set her beauty's praise above
         The sea-nymphs, and their powers offended.
         Yet thou art higher far descended:
         Thee bright-hair'd Vesta, long of yore,
         To solitary Saturn bore;
         His daughter she; in Saturn's reign
         Such mixture was not held a stain:
         Oft in glimmering bowers and glades
         He met her, and in secret shades
         Of woody Ida's inmost grove,
         Whilst yet there was no fear of Jove.

           Come, pensive nun, devout and pure,
         Sober, steadfast, and demure,
         All in a robe of darkest grain
         Flowing with majestic train,
         And sable stole of cypres lawn
         Over thy decent shoulders drawn:
         Come, but keep thy wonted state,
         With even step, and musing gait,
         And looks commercing with the skies,
         Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes:
         There, held in holy passion still,
         Forget thyself to marble, till
         With a sad leaden downward cast
         Thou fix them on the earth as fast:
         And join with thee calm Peace, and Quiet,
         Spare Fast, that oft with gods doth diet,
         And hears the Muses in a ring
         Aye round about Jove's altar sing:
         And add to these retired Leisure
         That in trim gardens takes his pleasure:—
         But first, and chiefest, with thee bring
         Him that yon soars on golden wing,
         Guiding the fiery-wheeléd throne,
         The cherub Contemplatión;
         And the mute Silence hist along,
         'Less Philomel will deign a song,
         In her sweetest saddest plight,
         Smoothing the rugged brow of Night,
         While Cynthia checks her dragon yoke
         Gently o'er the accustom'd oak.
         —Sweet bird, that shunn'st the noise of folly,
         Most musical, most melancholy!
         Thee, chauntress, oft the woods among
         I woo, to hear thy even-song;
         And, missing thee, I walk unseen
         On the dry smooth-shaven green,
         To behold the wandering moon,
         Riding near her highest noon,
         Like one that had been led astray
         Through the heaven's wide pathless way,
         And oft, as if her head she bow'd,
         Stooping through a fleecy cloud.

           Oft, on a plat of rising ground
         I hear the far-off curfeu sound,
         Over some wide-water'd shore,
         Swinging slow with sullen roar;
         Or, if the air will not permit,
         Some still removéd place will fit,
         Where glowing embers through the room
         Teach light to counterfeit a gloom;
         Far from all resort of mirth,
         Save the cricket on the hearth,
         Or the bellman's drowsy charm
         To bless the doors from nightly harm.

           Or let my lamp at midnight hour
         Be seen in some high lonely tower,
         Where I may oft out-watch the Bear,
         With thrice-great Hermes, or unsphere
         The spirit of Plato, to unfold
         What worlds or what vast regions hold
         The immortal mind that hath forsook
         Her mansion in this fleshy nook:
         And of those demons that are found
         In fire, air, flood, or under ground,
         Whose power hath a true consent
         With planet, or with element.
         Sometime let gorgeous Tragedy
         In sceptr'd pall come sweeping by
         Presenting Thebes, or Pelops' line,
         Or the tale of Troy divine;
         Or what (though rare) of later age
         Ennobled hath the buskin'd stage.

           But, O sad Virgin, that thy power
         Might raise Musaeus from his bower,
         Or bid the soul of Orpheus sing
         Such notes as, warbled to the string,
         Drew iron tears down Pluto's cheek
         And made Hell grant what Love did seek!
         Or call up him that left half-told
         The story of Cambuscan bold,
         Of Camball, and of Algarsife,
         And who had Canacé to wife
         That own'd the virtuous ring and glass;
         And of the wondrous horse of brass
         On which the Tartar king did ride;
         And if aught else great bards beside
         In sage and solemn tunes have sung
         Of tourneys, and of trophies hung,
         Of forests, and enchantments drear,
         Where more is meant than meets the ear.

           Thus, Night, oft see me in thy pale career,
         Till civil-suited Morn appear,
         Not trick'd and frounced as she was wont
         With the Attic Boy to hunt,
         But kercheft in a comely cloud
         While rocking winds are piping loud,
         Or usher'd with a shower still,
         When the gust hath blown his fill,
         Ending on the rustling leaves
         With minute drops from off the eaves.
         And when the sun begins to fling
         His flaring beams, me, goddess, bring
         To archéd walks of twilight groves,
         And shadows brown, that Sylvan loves,
         Of pine, or monumental oak,
         Where the rude axe, with heavéd stroke,
         Was never heard the nymphs to daunt
         Or fright them from their hallow'd haunt.
         There in close covert by some brook
         Where no profaner eye may look,
         Hide me from day's garish eye,
         While the bee with honey'd thigh,
         That at her flowery work doth sing,
         And the waters murmuring,
         With such consort as they keep
         Entice the dewy-feather'd Sleep.
         And let some strange mysterious dream
         Wave at his wings in aery stream
         Of lively portraiture display'd,
         Softly on my eyelids laid:
         And, as I wake, sweet music breathe
         Above, about, or underneath,
         Sent by some spirit to mortals good,
         Or the unseen Genius of the wood.

           But let my due feet never fail
         To walk the studious cloister's pale,
         And love the high-embowéd roof,
         With antique pillars massy proof,
         And storied windows richly dight
         Casting a dim religious light:
         There let the pealing organ blow
         To the full-voiced quire below
         In service high and anthems clear,
         As may with sweetness, through mine ear,
         Dissolve me into ecstasies,
         And bring all Heaven before mine eyes.

           And may at last my weary age
         Find out the peaceful hermitage,
         The hairy gown and mossy cell,
         Where I may sit and rightly spell
         Of every star that heaven doth show,
         And every herb that sips the dew;
         Till old experience do attain
         To something like prophetic strain.

           These pleasures, Melancholy, give,
         And I with thee will choose to live.

     J. MILTON.


     114. SONG OF THE EMIGRANTS IN BERMUDA.

     Where the remote Bermudas ride
     In the ocean's bosom unespied,
     From a small boat that row'd along
     The listening woods received this song.

       "What should we do but sing His praise
     That led us through the watery maze
     Where He the huge sea-monsters wracks,
     That lift the deep upon their backs,
     Unto an isle so long unknown,
     And yet far kinder than our own?
     He lands us on a grassy stage,
     Safe from the storms, and prelate's rage:
     He gave us this eternal spring
     Which here enamels everything,
     And sends the fowls to us in care
     On daily visits through the air.

     He hangs in shades the orange bright
     Like golden lamps in a green night,
     And does in the pomegranates close
     Jewels more rich than Ormus shows:
     He makes the figs our mouths to meet,
     And throws the melons at our feet;
     But apples plants of such a price,
     No tree could ever bear them twice.
     With cedars chosen by His hand
     From Lebanon He stores the land;
     And makes the hollow seas that roar
     Proclaim the ambergris on shore.

     He cast (of which we rather boast)
     The Gospel's pearl upon our coast;
     And in these rocks for us did frame
     A temple where to sound His name.
     O let our voice His praise exalt
     Till it arrive at Heaven's vault,
     Which then perhaps rebounding may
     Echo beyond the Mexique bay!"
     —Thus sung they in the English boat
     A holy and a cheerful note:
     And all the way, to guide their chime,
     With falling oars they kept the time.

     A. MARVELL.


     115. AT A SOLEMN MUSIC.

     Blest pair of Sirens, pledges of Heaven's joy,
     Sphere-born harmonious Sisters, Voice, and Verse,
     Wed your divine sounds, and mixt power employ
     Dead things with inbreathed sense able to pierce,
     And to our high-raised phantasy present
     That undisturbéd Song of pure concent,
     Ay sung before the sapphire-colour'd throne

        To Him that sits thereon,
     With saintly shout and solemn jubilee;
     Where the bright Seraphim in burning row
     Their loud uplifted angel-trumpets blow;
     And the Cherubic host in thousand quires
     Touch their immortal harps of golden wires,
     With those just Spirits that wear victorious palms
        Hymns devout and holy psalms
        Singing everlastingly:
     That we on earth, with undiscording voice
     May rightly answer that melodious noise;
     As once we did, till disproportion'd sin
     Jarr'd against nature's chime, and with harsh din
     Broke the fair music that all creatures made
     To their great Lord, whose love their motion sway'd
     In perfect diapason, whilst they stood
     In first obedience, and their state of good.
     O may we soon again renew that Song,
     And keep in tune with Heaven, till God ere long
     To His celestial consort us unite,
     To live with Him, and sing in endless morn of light!

     J. MILTON.


     116. ALEXANDER'S FEAST, OR, THE POWER OF MUSIC.

     'Twas at the royal feast for Persia won
     By Philip's warlike son—
     Aloft in awful state
     The godlike hero sate
     On his imperial throne;
     His valiant peers were placed around;
     Their brows with roses and with myrtles bound
     (So should desert in arms be crown'd).
     The lovely Thais by his side
     Sate like a blooming eastern bride
     In flower of youth and beauty's pride:—
     Happy, happy, happy pair!
     None but the brave
     None but the brave
     None but the brave deserves the fair.

       Timotheus placed on high
     Amid the tuneful quire
     With flying fingers touch'd the lyre:
     The trembling notes ascend the sky
     And heavenly joys inspire.
     The song began from Jove
     Who left his blissful seats above—
     Such is the power of mighty love!

     A dragon's fiery form belied the god;
     Sublime on radiant spires he rode
     When he to fair Olympia prest,
     And while he sought her snowy breast;
     Then round her slender waist he curl'd,
     And stamp'd an image of himself, a sovereign of the world.
     —The listening crowd admire the lofty sound!
     A present deity! they shout around:
     A present deity! the vaulted roofs rebound!
     With ravish'd ears
     The monarch hears,
     Assumes the god;
     Affects to nod
     And seems to shake the spheres.

       The praise of Bacchus then the sweet musician sung:
     Of Bacchus ever fair and ever young:
     The jolly god in triumph comes!
     Sound the trumpets, beat the drums!
     Flush'd with a purple grace
     He shows his honest face:
     Now give the hautboys breath; he comes, he comes!
     Bacchus, ever fair and young,
     Drinking joys did first ordain;
     Bacchus' blessings are a treasure,
     Drinking is the soldier's pleasure:
     Rich the treasure,
     Sweet the pleasure,
     Sweet is pleasure after pain.

       Soothed with the sound, the king grew vain;
     Fought all his battles o'er again,
     And thrice he routed all his foes; and thrice he slew the slain!
     The master saw the madness rise,
     His glowing cheeks, his ardent eyes;
     And while he Heaven and Earth defied
     Changed his hand and check'd his pride.

     He chose a mournful Muse
     Soft pity to infuse:
     He sung Darius great and good,
     By too severe a fate
     Fallen, fallen, fallen, fallen,
     Fallen from his high estate,
     And weltering in his blood;
     Deserted, at his utmost need,
     By those his former bounty fed;
     On the bare earth exposed he lies
     With not a friend to close his eyes.

     —With downcast looks the joyless victor sate,
     Revolving in his alter'd soul
     The various turns of Chance below;
     And now and then a sigh he stole;
     And tears began to flow.

       The mighty master smiled to see
     That love was in the next degree;
     'Twas but a kindred-sound to move,
     For pity melts the mind to love.
     Softly sweet, in Lydian measures,
     Soon he soothed his soul to pleasures.
     War, he sung, is toil and trouble,
     Honour but an empty bubble,
     Never ending, still beginning;
     Fighting still, and still destroying;
     If the world be worth thy winning,
     Think, O think, it worth enjoying:
     Lovely Thais sits beside thee,
     Take the good the gods provide thee!

     —The many rend the skies with loud applause;
     So Love was crown'd, but Music won the cause.
     The prince, unable to conceal his pain,
     Gazed on the fair
     Who caused his care,
     And sigh'd and look'd, sigh'd and look'd,
     Sigh'd and look'd, and sigh'd again:
     At length, with love and wine at once opprest
     The vanquish'd victor sunk upon her breast.

       Now strike the golden lyre again:
     A louder yet, and yet a louder strain!
     Break his bands of sleep asunder,
     And rouse him, like a rattling peal of thunder.
     Hark, hark! the horrid sound
     Has raised up his head:
     As awaked from the dead,
     And amazed he stares around.
     Revenge, revenge, Timotheus cries,
     See the Furies arise!

     See the snakes that they rear
     How they hiss in their hair,
     And the sparkles that flash from their eyes!
     Behold a ghastly band
     Each a torch in his hand!
     Those are Grecian ghosts, that in battle were slain
     And unburied remain
     Inglorious on the plain:
     Give the vengeance due
     To the valiant crew!

     Behold how they toss their torches on high,
     How they point to the Persian abodes
     And glittering temples of their hostile gods.
     —The princes applaud with a furious joy:
     And the king seized a flambeau with zeal to destroy;
     Thais led the way,
     To light him to his prey,
     And like another Helen, fired another Troy!

     —Thus, long ago,
     Ere heaving bellows learn'd to blow,
     While organs yet were mute,
     Timotheus, to his breathing flute
     And sounding lyre
     Could swell the soul to rage, or kindle soft desire.
     At last divine Cecilia came,
     Inventress of the vocal frame;
     The sweet enthusiast from her sacred store
     Enlarged the former narrow bounds,
     And added length to solemn sounds,
     With Nature's mother-wit, and arts unknown before.
     —Let old Timotheus yield the prize
     Or both divide the crown;
     He raised a mortal to the skies;
     She drew an angel down!

     J. DRYDEN. END
